g 1 


W 


INTERPRETATION | 


DREAMS; 


2 | By n e can nee. 


bs 


1” 


RTIMEDORUS | 


Firſt written in GRERK, and 8 ns 
into divers foreign aer, and now made i in- E= 
to ExoLiom. _ | 2, 


— w —5: 
bs * 


— 


EP | 


PL %. 
* 


3 2 1% 0 7 


ful and * for all fore of People, 


* 


4 A Treatiſe of great Value and Edleem, and very d 


oy - * 


ö | The » Twenty Fourth EDITION. | 
[2 SY LONDON: 1 


| Printed for 8. inde aid Co. 2 Hick, L. W 
N in Patermfter-Row, and 0 * Ware and _ CY 
OO ack 


1 
1 


* — 


22525 25555 — 


„% & 


* — — 


Was: oi ns 


Ome are of opinion, that, dreams, which ariſe of 
natural and carnal affection, are likewiſe ſo to 
Ie interpreted; as an uſurer to dream of gold, or any 


Heir natures are prone and ſubject unto, But our 
Luthor, Antimedorus, doth not agree with them in 
their opinion; but faith, dreams of any importance, 


effect, and the experience of them: and contrawiſe, 
the affirmeth that thoſe dreams, which are ſhapen to 
Pur affections and thoughts, are, to ſpeak ingeniouſly 
Fs. much as nothing, and we muſt take no heed of 

hem. And ſurely Fla confident, that an ordinary 

Dre-maſter, an avaritious extortioner, an envious 
derſon, or an ambitious man, a flatterer, or diſſem- 


tendeth to the honour or profit either of himſelf, his 
friends, or of the common wealth. But it often- 

i imes cometh to paſs, that an honeft, pute, chaſte, 
and vertuqus man (becauſe he is exempt from human 
raility) I think may and ſhall often ſee, and inter- 
ret dreams and viſions, to the ſafety, honour, and 

| Profit of himſelf, his friends and commonwealth ; for- 

| Wſmuch as his ſpirit is leſs apt to be bound, tied, and 
oiled with the fellowſhip of the b:dy. In the Holy 
cripture, we have experience both in the Old and 
t 


4 
. 


whereby he ſbeweth, 2 it was no new thing if God 
An l 21 2 »* > By 


wa.” & 


Wo \ 


70 te READER, - 


other carnal men, when they dream of ſuch things as 


for which come of God, are far different, from their 


bler, or a common or notorious drunkard do not. 
ommonly fee any good dreams, or any dream that 


New Teftament . Foſeph the fon of Jacob and Foſeph 
he husband of the Virgin Mary, St. Peter in the fe- 
ond of the Ads, repeateth the prophecy of J; 


ew 


4% ene 


— 


* 


4 


LY 


FE; * 4 Ty 
ſent viſions and * There. are other places 


= 


- TY = * 3 
2 


| the Holy Scriptures which I ſhall forbear here to inſerf 


ſufficient to prove the antiquity of them. . 
Touching hiftories,. you may ſee much of the ii 


and experience of dreams: /7-giPs mother, when i 
was with child of him, dreamed that ſhe ſaw a bran 


of laurel growing, and ſhe brought forth a poet, 


whom was given a laurel crown. Alſo Hecubi 


queen of Trey, when ſhe was with child of Pari 


dreamed that ſhe ſhould bring foi ch a firebrand, thi 


ſhould at once conſume the whole country, and 


terwards it proved true: for the ſaid Paris, of whol 
. ſhe was deliver'd, was the cauſe of the ruin, burninl 
and deſtruction of Trey; which was interpreted bf 


his ſiſter Caſſandra, to whom they gave no creditſ 
whereupon the miſchief ſeized not only upon t! 


king and queen, father and mother to the ſaid Pari 
but alſo upon the whole kingdom, whoſe miſeradſ 


deſtruction is recorded to this day. Sacrates dream 
that he ſaw alittle Swan in his lap, whoſe feathers greif 
and preſently ſpreading its wings, and flying on high 


fang a ſweet and harmonious ſong ; and the day 


% a 


when his daughter was with child, tha 
. - ariſe from the nature of a vine growing ſo faſt, thilf 


alledg 
> loſopher expounded, and according to which el 
tion it fell out. Alſo, Cicero, Hannibal Ca. 


and many others, which had dreams and Viſions! * 


' 


lowing, Plato came to him to be his ſcholar, who b 5 


bis eloquence ſang ſweetly. King A/tzage, dreamed 


the boughs thereof ſhould over ſhade the regions d 


| his dominions, which afterwards fell out accordingly 
for ſhe bare Cyrus the great, king of Perſia, who wil 


mafter and lord of all thoſe countries. I might beſidYy 
e Philip of Macedon father to Alexander the phi 


'nigt 


there ſhoul 


4 


- = ae _ * W , þ * — 
ix * "AS 
* * _ 9 
* » p 


inſerf tht, whoſe effects came to paſs, as great and divers 
Mories do verify. But for brevities fake, I ſhall * 


= 


ie iſfi bear to inftance any more particulars, left I ſhould 
en ſend my reader, with preſuming too much upon his 
bran{tience. Leſs I ſhould have ſaid, but was loath to 


et, Muve the curious unſatiched. . 120062 
lecubi And to conclude, it ſeemeth to me great arrogancy 
Pari any man, to fay all viſions and dreams are vain and 
„ thi none effect; which hath already been proved falſe, 
nd a many hiſtories both divine. and human: and, I 
whoWink, it were to diſpute againſt God, and wrong to 
urninffſe ſou] of man, which is, indeed, the mirrour of 
ted bMeavenly things, in making it always in all things un- 
:reditfofitable, a vagabond, vain, and idle, ſeeing that 
When the body reſteth the foul ſeemeth moſt to'reign 


- 


On tl | 

Pari d rule in her force and virtue, and in her ſpiritual, 
ſerab@prehenſible, and intellectual nobility. Wherefore 
reameſ will agree in opinion with Socrates, who faith, that 
s greian, whether he live or die, is in the hand of God, 
| highho takern all his affairs in his hand, and in care diſ- 


ay t 


dſeth them at his pleaſure, and forewarns nim bx 
yvho bl 


any ſecret and hidden ways, as it pleaſeth him. 
Reader, I intreat thee to take notice that the three 
books were written long after the two firſt ; as ap- 
harcth. He ſeeing that in the two former there 
Wanted ſome things which the diligent and curious 
Rader might defire, collected and gathered togetber - 
pe things contained in his three laſt books : which he 
Fould not add to the two former for the reaſon which 
ie phil giveth in the end of the ſecond; por yet would 
xpoſitſ bliſh them by themſelves, but rather gives them the 
urnidl le, becauſe they ſo depend upon the "two former, 
ons bat in ſome ſpeeches they may ſeem to be repeated a- 
nigh VE 0-4 | gain 


| 


— 


9 
7 - 
* —— * — ne 4 1 
pr ET —— ã U— —— — — — . — ER — ko. 
” 
= 
- 
9 . 
„ , * 
% 
* 


— — —— — 
r 9“ ——̃ —-—— —r̃ — 


— — 


— 
- ”— 
1 
- 
* 


_ = — 2 N 


('6 ) 


"rok or diverkty of fre» Th t 

I doubt nt but ſome men, at the firſt debe, when 
they read this book, willthink it a vain and frivoloui 
thing; for I, before 1 had conſidered. the book. p 
thought as much : but after that By long time and con- 
tinuance, I had compared "theſe things with experience, 
as well in my ſelf as others, I could not but reverence} 
and admire both the works and the author. And 18 
um of opinion, that there is no judicious reader, but 
will yield unto this truth, and therefore I ſhall forbearf 
to bring any further proofs, but commit thee to the 
peruſal of chat which followeth : And reſt, I i 


— Th lu Fried. | 
| : R WOOD. 


* 


r Th | cel 


* 


1 IMEDORU 8. 


HE time and place of the birth * a 


Ence,: 

rence  medorus, is as . uncertain as his memory 
\nd | is famous, The authors who have made 
„ but mention of him, do differ as much in the 
be at lation of the former, as they do all agree in W 


Pur of the latter. a 

We ſhall find that ſeveral countries and cities; 2 

s ſometimes: for the nativity of Homer, did en- 

$-avour to add unto their glories, by a noble claim _ 

hey made to have an intereſt in him, by flattering 

pfterity and themſelves, that he received his origi 

mal from them. 

Perganum in Aſia, doth regiſter him to be born 

Pere, and from thence the wan and he was alled* 

Artimedorus Petgamenus. 

The iſle of Sicily is as ambitious to acknowledge 

Him to be hers, and thereupon the gives him the title 

„ Artimedotus Etnenſis; we de ſhall And nd in Cluverius,- 

The other authors, that in the year of the world 37 30, 

| Which was 273 years before the incarnation of our 

Saviour, that Artimedorus was governour of the city 

pf Sytacuſia in Sicily; with Hiero ; and that he was 

' Kimous « 0-09-40 497 was, pd ſecrets of nature, ny; 
ie ſtudy of philoſophy. & 

Ccelus Rhodoginus being willing to take advan- 

pee from the meer credit of bis antiquity, will - v 

Fl] you, that he ſtudied thoſe parts of heb y 

nich were written by Hermes Triſmegiſtus, and 

ꝙ92a 4 was 


g 


| 
' f 


a — — — 
wy 


_ wroksw'a wp Hy fir 
; the n ties Egyptians. | 


'frmeth, 


— — - — 
— — R 
4 . o * vx My : 
. N - * - , 
* 1 = 


; LIFE " pt a 
was exact in thoſe obſeryations of geography, and thoſe | 
pieces of the mathematics, whichiwere ſai be left 
unto Foſderity by ae Anaxamander.. 


Diodorus the 


maketh mention, that he 
_ beginning of Meng and that 
he aſcribed the honour of n in Os not to 


12 * 


8 olfipineuting be 11 compile A book | 
of laws and cuſtoms, in all which, for the honouf of 


antiquity, be ſheweth how much reverence, cuſtoms 


and laws have gained from the only merit of their 
continuance; and as a cuſtom by meer continuance 


doth wear itſelf into a law ſo the more aged any 


la is grown, the leſs obnoxious it is to be reſerved, | 


or repealed, and every true thing being the true 


which was the firſt, and that being the firſt, whitu 


was from the beginning ; by how much more old and 


more ſtricken in years any law is, by-fo much it is the 


letz ſubject to faultier, ot to grow dectepid ; and this 


js che reaſon which as he alledgeth doth confiim the 


ate of any law in its integrity, becauſe the longer it 
endureth, the more, be 2 4 


feftion, that is, to a. condition to grow never null, ory 
eee N 2th 911 3608 t 4 760 


He wrote alſo a 2 25 3 in the treaty © 


/ whereof although be was a heathen, and ignorant 
of, divine truths, yet he ſeemeth to come more near 


unto it than Plato, who had the honour among the ' 


iN gentle to de ſtiled the divine philoſopher, for Plato af- 
| that man at the firſt was, by interpreta- 
. Gong Man Ames vhs ide in that one budy'Yie 3 


” 
* rn bad 
" » » * - td 
i*þ * * [ * * C 


; 


£ 6 a 8 e 


2 is z” 3 


= 
2 
i 


'; 


ith, it inclineth to its per- 


3X 


* 1 
T- * 


P 
ll  ARFIMEDORUS. 9 
thoſe | ad. the faculty, without the belp of any ſecond 
: left 0 * generate another like unto himfelt; which 
fterwards, as he faith, altered. But Artimede- 
s ſpeaking of marriage, and the political ends 
d he hereof, to diſtinguiſh private inteteſts from pub- 
that ick and common, and things facred from pro- 
ot to Pane, doth imply that marriage is as old 


” 
* 


+ Wature and that there was no fooner one, but 
„ Friſe nature did divide him into two, and then 
2 hey were no ſooner "we but ws Fg ſtrait 
ot united into one agaig. It is recorded by my, aur 
toms wag that this iu did leave bebind him 
Meir many books, which by their jury of tinie, arg 
ance qgerived to poſterity only in Fragments, in 


au imperfect pieces, as are the writing of Pephe; | 
ved, Sr, and of Linus, whoſe. father is faid te bg 


WS, 2 


lb. a 868 12 
PN "of Kune > lep Sen, "hack 
in the iſle of Gridu; where, with fingular ape, 
de plauſe, be was profeſſor of the Greek ase a 
| this what time the civil wars betwixt Julias Cæſar 
»tbe and Pompey the great, had divided the whole 
er it world into two Pariſhes: the one adhereing unto . 
per- FCzſar, and the other to the fortunes. of Lee 
I, or But the ſword having laid all things low, 
the thunder of the wars draining the harmony 
of the arts, Irtimedorus addrefled himſelf to 
eaty 1 Rome, where, thaugh it was in the DIO of tu- 
rent mult and diſorder, yet the Gown did ſtill grant 
near both reyerence and protection unto learning, 
; the Here, with as much ſafety as advantage, he did, 
© af- put again into practice his profeſſion of the Greet 
reta- 7 tongue; and Po much, abcut the fame time! 
be being ſtayed in Agyp!, 4rtimederus became one of 
bad tbe. confidents of r and Caſſius, who Hes 

ST ns N | em- 


0 


g 
; 


al”. 


-4 , N 

by - 8 3 
F = - * * 6 5 . 4 
- 


_ | „ A AA <5. 1 
10 Ai 
themſelves the. defenders of the Roman liberty: 
here, by this great inſpection into Phylfophy, and 
the courſe and circumſtances of the affairs in the 
world, he wiſely diſcovered the great revolution 
approaching, and ſaw Brutus's Malus Genius at 
Rome, before himſelf had ſeen it at the fields 
of Philippi, under the pretence of melancholy, Þ 
contracted by too much fludy, he diſſembled 
with Brutus, and removing as well his perſon as 
affection, from his intereſt, and himſelf; he 
1 - drew up an information to be preſented unto | 
Czſar, containing the handling of the plot, in the 
whole. courſe of - the conſpiracy, againſt . himſelf, 
At the ſame time the wife of Cæſar, who, as ſhe ? 
. was much honoured with the Trophies of her 
huſbands Victories, ſo ſhe was no leſs troubled 3 
at the capticiouſneſs of his incontinency, as 
may appear by the unrebuked petulance of his 
own ſoldies, in the day of his greateſt glory, 
when he did ride in triumph to the Capitol. 


- 


Romani ſervate uxores mœchum calvum adducimus. 4 


Look to your wives, you romans, for we do 


* Bring a bald pated leacher unto you. 


Feet _ preferring her duty on that morning he 
died, above her paſſion, ſhe informed. her huſ- 
band of the fad dream which on the night be- 
fore aflifted her, and which had ſtill left a great 
impreſſion upon her ſpirits; and - did beſeech 
" him for that day to forbear to go to the Senate houſe. - 
There was at that time no man in Rome more 
famous for the interpretation of dreams 2 
2 Wu, Arti- 


- 
* — — — - 
— —ͤ 
* 


—_ —_ 


o — — — 
Derg — — — — 
= 


—__ "— — 
= 


* * 


y ARTIMEDORUS. It: 
Artimedotus, who - underſtanding of it, and the 
Jule reputation that Cæſar gave unto the 


the Wream, be reſolved with bimſelf to put the 
ution Miſcovery of the treaſon into Cæſar's own 
is at and, and to beſeech him to vouchſafe a preſent 
fields Peruſal of it, without the delivering, the paper 
holy, e his manners was, into the hands of his Secre- 
abled ary, or the maſter of requeſts. Cæſar began 
n as Ince or twice to caſt his eye upon the paper, and 


e rather oecauſe it came from the hand of Ar- 
s, whoſe merit be did intend by his 
zounty to oblige unto him; but ſo great, was, 


| 


'TICLIT 


aſelf, he multitude that followed him, either to con- 
s he ratulate his fortune or to admire his ambiti- 
" her dn, that they almoſt hurried him into the Senate- 


bled houſe, to the prepared Daggers of Brutus and \ 
as Caſſius. I do the rather make mention of this in. 
bis his place, to preſent unta you, that when the 
ory, ſands of our days are numbered in the Glaſs of 
time neither the preconition of a dream by 
_ KF. moſt tender wiſ-; nor the interpretation of 
Us, znduſtry of men, ſhall be able either to add or 
etract, or make the leaſt alteration in the de- 


Frees of providence. . 33 


* 


If you will wipe eff the duſt of antiquity 


i om the Hiſtory of the Lydians, you ſhall read 


he of Artimedorus, who being famious for philoſo- 
huſ- phy, floariſhed in the City of Daldis, and did 
be- write a book of the interpretation of dreams; 
reat be was eſteemed as one of the wiſeſt men 
ech in thoſe days, as Stephanus reporteth, and it 
ſe. ſeems that either by a confidence in himſelf, or 


ore by the perſwaſion of his friends, he did believe | 
han zumſelf to be fo; for in the latter end of one of 
rti- 08 LO his 


- 


2 bt nN A * 


. his bocks Gf the interpretation of dreams, he de- 
fireth that nothing may be added to it, He wrote 
alſo a book of chitomancy, and another of augury, 
thatis, of reading of fortunes by looking oy hand, 
and paſſages by birds, By their Bring Ga rae tie | 
hard and on your left or by hopping on 
before you. 

þ "We. are yedparing theſe alſo for the mtelsy to te | 
performance whereof we ſhall be ſo much the more 
encouraged, as we ſhall find, that this book of inter- 

F — 7 of ben doth r meet bu ber e 


l : 
i 29 
* 
yy 
w_ / 
{ * 0 
N * 5 
g 
N ART 1 
* - 4 
10 
Jo's 
WL »> Af 
O89 
* 4 - 
"Ns 
i 
14 
il 
| 
| * 
i " 
j 8 
11 1 1 


His Expoſiion 67 - 2 A 


D * E A N 8 


"The Firſt BO. _ 


= 


' 6 V "Prams eitber ſolely Speculative, or Mlegoris « 
| a 1 cally Stgnificative. 62%, | 
R EAM S are either ſpeculative; and. 1 
" 1 agreeable to their viſion, as When 3. 
2 man dreams that the ſhip wheres. - 
in be is doth periſh; and riſing, finds it trug 
and ſaves. himſelf, with ſome few, beſides: or 
Alle gorical, by ene thir g ſignifying another 
| Fwhcreby. our Souls doth raturally adviſe us 
that under them there is {i mewhat abſtruce, 
T T. ſecret, or hid. Faſt therefore I will ſet down 
the definition of a dream in general, againſt 
vhich to object, were to love contention. A 
dream therefore is a motion of fiftion of the 
Soul in a diverſe form, ſigniſying cicher good 
15 1 OF evil to come. Of dreams, ſuch as belong 4 
not to others, being only for or againſt thoſe 
which ſce them, as tu ſpeak, to ſing, to dance, 


* 
4» . = 
b 8 


to fight, or to ſyim. But things which are about 


the body; or outward things, as beds, cheſts, 

1 aud cloathing, Sc Although hs 
be improper and Paruicylag 4 yet, it falls out 
e 


— 


un ARTIHEDORUS. | 


” cording to the neceflity and propricty of the | 


friend, the daughter and the ſiſter. Morcover, 
all thoſe which are done by us, and in us, 


appertain to us particularly yz and on the con- 


and the dreams Ggnific good, the joy ſhatil || 
come to us, and it contrary, then the con- 
- trafy : but it they b. our enemies, we ought 


— 
1 


4 Ry * 1 „ * 1 . 
WT; 
I ® * 1 » . 2 - 1 


that often they come to our neighbours ac- if 
ulage. And in ſuch ſort the head ſignifies the 


father, the right hand che mother, the ſon, 
and the brother ; the I-ft hand the wife, the 


and towards us only; we mult think that they 
trary, all ſuch as are not donc by us, nor to- 


wards us, nor in us, ſhajl happen to others; 
and yct notwithſtanding, jf they be our friends, 


to think and judge accordingly. f 
; Of the Birth. -q 


I F any one dr.ams that he comes out of a2 


womans belly, as to be born 1:to the F 


world, he muſt judge in this ſort. This 
dream is good for him that is poor, for he 


ſhail have means or friends which will main- | 


"tain him; or if he be not a tradeſman, and of 


an art which requires the work of the 
hand, for this dream forewarns him that 
he ſhould be withour work, as children | 


which have their hands bound together : | 
To him which is rich, this dream fignifieth | 
that he ſhall have no rule in the houſe, | 


but | 


t rs ſhall overrule him ala his will * 
the br chi dten are governed by others. * To 
the Him whoſe wife is not with child, it ſigni- 

fon, eth that he ſhall loſe his wife; for children 


the te not married, nor eome at woman: but 
ver, o him whoſe wife is with child, it ſignifieth 
us, at he ſhall have a ſon in all things; ue? him- 
hey if; and he ſhall be fo like him, as if him- 


ef were born twice. To champions and 
| Fombaran:s this dream is ill; for children 
tan neither go nor run, and Cannot. aſſall 
Iny man. To him which is in the count 

Fhat he ſhall return home, as if he ſhould 10. 
urn to his beginning. To a ſick man it ſig· 
Pißieth death, becauſe the dead are wrapped in 
| on cloaths, as children, and laid in the 
Proun 


To be big with Child 


＋ any being poor, dream that he is gree 
with child: he ſhall become rich, and ſhall © 
geatner a great deal of money: If he be rich) - 
he ſhall be in pain and care. He'which hath | 
wife, ſhall loſe her, having no more need 
That ſhe ſhall bear children. He which hath 


4 


— 
4 


ic ſignißeth ſickneſs; but to be big with⸗ 
| child. and then to be delivered, is all one; 
for it means that the ſick perſon ſhall die 


debied, : 


no wife, - ſhall have a gentle one. To others 4 | 


Bquickty. . But to him that is poor, and in- l 


7 * . 


9 


"i ALEEIMS Piet. 


' (debted, enduring pain and miſery, it is aun end 
r ot all his preſent evils , 5 
il pages! revealeth ſecrets This drca 

cos to rich uſurets, factors, and alx ſuch t 

FE - in authoriiy; for that which they had be. 

fore they ſhall loſe. But to merchants and fai. 

Ex ty to them WH e ſhips, this dream 
* To many after this 9 hath 
Þ 4 hap: e parens. 


| bike To Bare Children. 2 
O- FREY that you ſee or have children 
of your own, and not of other mens, iz 
ill to man and wife: for it foretells care and 
keavineſs for, neceſſſtries, without the which 
children cannot be _hourifhed, But the male 
children bring good ſucceſs ; daughters bring 
an end worſe than the beghnaing; for they 
are married wich a dowry, I know a man 
Which dreamed he had a daughter born, and 
borrowed money upon intereſt. And the con- 
fide, I knew another which dreamed that 
12 + a Seen] his daughter deceaſed, and it fell 
dot, that he was conſtrained to pay a debt 
for which he was bound. So then his daugh- 
ter made an agreement with the debt. But to 
te Other mens children is good, when they 
are fait and well fa youred, for this ſigaikerh 


* daun ESE and MIB) tim: it àt hand. of 


PP o 


2 - 


1 of 1 Divan. uy 
Children 1 in Cloaths, and Linnen 3 
F an "one. frm to 2g himſcif wrappe 
in cloaths in faſbion of little children, a 
ſuck ſome-womaps-dugs which he knoweth, -- © 


BK: argueth. Jong ſickneſs if he hath, not his 
ife with child, for then he ſhould; have a ſon; A 


drn like himſelf. And if his wife hath ſuch 
dream, ſhe ſhill have a daughter. But if 
one being in priſon hath ſuch a dream, the® 3 
evil ſhall ſtir op ſuch accuſations. againſt 
im, that he ſhall — be delivered 3 and it 1 
is hot without reaſon, to judge the like in ſiek, 
As: But to. ſee in a dream to have milk in 
er dugs, to a young woman it ſignifieth ſne 
Al conceive, and her fruit-ſhall: come to per- 
Qtion' z: to an old woman being poor it ſigni- 
. riches, being rich in expence and ꝗiberali- 
to a maid, that her marriage is near, for 
wat the company of a man the can have 
0 milk; but if ſhe be a pretty maid, and 
ath been long unmarried, it fignifieth her 
death s for all things coming beyond the ac- 
aftomed age are evil, ſome few. excepted. 
. 9 a poor man it is abundarice of money and 
doſſeſſions, if he can nouriſh others. More- 
over, I have known by experience, that this 
dream to one. that was not married, ſoreteld a 
Wie; and to- one that had uo childred, it 
Of forctold children. But 0 a 2 an = 


138 48TIMEDORUS. | 

an artificer, and all ſuch as in their eſtate travel Z 
and move the body, it ſignifies ſickneſs, Al- 
ſo I knew one having wife and children, who 
| had this dream, loſt his wife by death, and al- 
ways after himſelf nouriſhed his children, ex- 


erciſing towards them the duty of father and 4 
veer together, N 


eiii LY 


" Of obey: Head. 


* To dream you have à great head is good 
** "to a rich man which hath not as yet any 
great eſtate and' dignity 3 alſo ro a poor man, 
to a champion, te an uſurer, to a horſe- | 
{- courſer, to him that puts out money to uſe. 
| For firſt, this dream foretells principality or 
7 dignity, in which he muſt wear a crown, ſcep- | 
ter, or diadem. 24h, Great riches and poſ- 
ſeſſions. To a champion victory: To a broker, 
an uſurer, great heaps and ſums of money: 
But to thoſe who are already in dignity, and | 
to an orator and judge of the pebple, this 
dream brings charges and re a apr" by the 
KN. — 8 and to him that is ſick, it is headach : 
ol a ſoldier it ſignifieth travel and pain: 
to a ſcrvant long ſervitude, and to him which 
hath choſen a calm life, pain and anger. But 
to have the head leſſer than natural proportion 
i! Fgnifieth a thing contrary to the. fignification 
* the head above ſpoken of; importing diffe- 
rences in reſpect of * different quality of the 


man. of 


Fd 


— y - 


His Interpretation of Dene, > 19 
of long Hair. | 


75 you * you have fair long hair and 
ſeem to take pride therein, it ſignifieth 
00d, eſpecially to a woman; as alſo to a wiſe 

Fan, a biſhop, a ſouthſayer, a king, and a 

Prince: for to ſuch as uſe to let their hair 

row, this dream is good, becauſe their pro- 

(ſions permits them to keep their treſſes. It 

2 good for others but not, to one ſelf; and it ſig- 


. ifcth to them only riches, and thoſe painful 
wrſe.. Not pleaſant, for one muſt ſtay time, and in 
aſe, | pat time it may be ney: pain before long hair 
or vill come. | 
. 5 07 Hair i in ill Order. WT. 
ker, | 1 Ong hair, but out of order, and as it were 
ey: rather hard and rough hair of ones beard, 
and pr head being in treſſes, betokeneth to all per- 

this Wons anger and heavineſs: and J once ſaw a 
che {worthy gentleman placed in authority, and 
ch: Happy. alſo in all his other affairs, who in a 


in: dream ſeemed to ſee thoſe which were under 
Shim, go before him, and alſo that they had 
But I hair all cut rude and out of order, whereupon 
ion I told him that it ſignificd heavineſs unto him. 
ion And preſently after he was diſcharged of his 
ffe. office and authority, which (you may well 
the think) was grievous unto him. 


2 of 


29. ARTIMEDORUS. 


E rfommonly ſudjcet to. Tp have horſe hai, 


9 have 'wool inſtead of hairs, foretells 


Alſo, if having thin wool on his head he ſhall} 
think that it is natural unto him, if the hairs? 


moſt think 'accordingly ; that is according to 
the thing whereunto we think them WP) 


betokeneth ſudden ſhame, hinderance of pre | 


| head' inzthat ſort, is poverty, and ill luck ii 
old age: It any one hath the right ſide of biel 
head ſhaved and naked, he ſhall loſe all his 
male kindred ; and if he hath none, he ſhall 
| ſuſtain. hurt. If contrariwiſe the left fide of 
bis head be without hair, it is loſs of couſins, 


— _ — 


07 Hogs briſtles, and Horſe hair. 


0 dream, that you have hogs-briſtles i $1 
great and violent dangers, ſuch as the hog] 


ey ene! of ſervitude and miſery. . 
Jo bave 2 inflead of Hairs. 


long ficknefs, and fantaſies, and the itch. 


ſeem to be changed into any other thing, we 


To ſeem to be without hair- about the face, 


ſent affairs: but to ſee the hinder part of the 


and allies, for the head ſigniheth the kin- 


dred, the right fide the male, the left the fe- 


mals, and 10 through all the body. To have 
all the hindcr parts of the head naked, is 
for him Which goes to law, for him 
hat. is. fearful, for him that is ſhut up and 


| | SES detained 


Hi Itefprotation , \Dreams. I 


Jerained by force, he/ſhall fly and cap 8 '4 
dark ing that one canner carelvhitn by the har 
Wing 8 N K 4: g % 3 
7 fee Bin olf poll or re Way 2 

TT OR to (ce himſelf polled on the head, is 
51 good for jeſters that uſe to make men 
augh, and to ſuch as are commonly ſfia d en: 
ro all others it is evil, for it betokeneth as 
5 och nakedneſs and barrennels, if it bring 
. Woot greater evils, and more at hand. To 
Wnavigators it is evident ſhipwreck. To ſick 
rs per ſons great peril, and yet not death; for 


fickneſs, ſhave themſelves, but not the dead, 
To be polled by the barber, is good to all 
ia general; for ſurely no man, being in any: 
e | eee eſtate, will poll themſclves, ſee- ? 
N thoſe only regard ſuch outward- orna- 
22 the head, which are without ſorrow, 
or want: I therefore: add by the hands of a 
© barber, becauſe if any man ſhaves himſelf, it 
1 betokeneth ſudden heavineſs, or very ill luck. 
Moreover, to be ſcratched with nails, to him 
chat is in debt, it betokens that he ſhall acquit 
$ himſelf ;-to otners, it foretells bars by them 
that ſcratch them. | 7 i 
Of the Mounbasd e. . oP 
T7 Forehead ſound and fleſhy, is: . * 
to all, and — liberty of ſpeech, 
=_ "gt, 


* ſuch as eſcape a ſhipwreck, or recover after 


» ſtrength, and conſtancy. But to dream tha 
ou have a forechead of Braſsy iron, or ſtc 
to all bakers, vintners, and ſuch as live by 


TMEDORUS. 


- ſhameleſs gain, is good, and to thoſe only: fo 
to others i it breeds hate. | 


07 the Ears. + 
| Fon to have many ears, is good to hin; 
that would have any one obedient to hi 
is wife, children, ſervants. To the rich it ſig ; 
nifies great renown of his good, if the ears bg 
fair and well ſhapen ; but to his ill, if the ear: 
+ be U]-favoured,. or deformed. This dream i 
ill to a ſervant, as alſo to him which hath : 
ſuit in law, be he the plaintiff or defendant 
but it is good to arr artifice, or. to one tha 
worketh A #1 his hands, for” he ſhall have 
many that will imploy him. To loſe the cars? 
betokeneth the contrary to all that is aforeſaid 
To clean ones ears, is good news which ſhal 
come to us on ſome fide : contrariwiſe, the ears 
. beaten and chafed, do foretell ill news. 


© Off Emmets going into the Ears. 
Tc 2 dream of emmets getting into the ea 
| good only to ſophiſters, philoſophers, 
and hool-maſters : for the emmets repreſent 
children, which will give audience to ſophiſters 
; To others it foretells death: for they ard 
daughters of the earth, and go again: to theſh 
earth. 1 know one which dreamed his twoſfo 
„ ears 


= 


© His Interpretation of Dreams. 23 
ars were filled with ears of corn, and how the 
ern fell into his hands, and he heard news 
What his brothers heir was dead, his heir, by 
eaſon of the ears of the corn; and his bro- 
hers heir, becauſe the ears repreſented brothers 
d ſiſters. To dream you have aſſcs ears, is 
Food only for philoſophers, to others it is ſer- 
itude and miſery, To have the ears of a 
Ton, or wolf, or any other crue] beaſt, is 
Wnares and deceit by envy :; moreover, to dream 
What you have eyes for ears, ſignifieth blindneſs © 
r deafneſs, PH. er | 
Of the Brows. 


HE brows hair, and of a good grace, are 

good to all, eſpecially to women : but the 
brows naked and without hair, ſignifieth to 
I ill ſucceſs of buſineſs, ſingle combate, and 


grief. | — | 
=, Of the Eves. 2 
O have à ſharp ſight, is good generally: 


| Fnoney, impeachment of affairs. To him that 
.rsMhath children, it forctells, they ſhall be ſick.” 
ers To be blind of both eyes, is loſs of children, 
entÞrethren, father and mother: notwithſtanding ' 
ers This dream is good for him which is in priſon, 
are and to him which is very poor ; for the firſt 
theſhall no more ſee his evils about him, the ſe- 
woſftond ſhall have wherewith- to aid and * -4 


ars 


but a troubled look ſignifieth want of“!“ 


BP” 24 r 


ſure bimſelf, as many are ready to 
their helping hand to be blind, But . 
dream bier ſuch as ate making bag ve ve 
Auges: as alſo it forewarns him that is in 
ſtrange country, that he returns not he 
for 'he that hath loft! his fight can neither | 
in a ſtrange country, nor find his'own- hou 
Alſo this dream is bad ſor a ſoldier, and 
ſo to all: the dealing trades; ſor their affa 
mall have but bad ſucceſs Alſo it is croſs 
E © navigators; - and ſuch as. contemplate i Mn 
ſtars, and are wizards. And if any one't 
is in ſearch of a thing that is loſt, dre: 
this dream, he ſhall never find it. To poq 
this dream is good, for they had necd | 
great ſleep, when they would write verſ 
- To. ſick perſons this dream brings daily e 
ee for death. If any one dreams 
hath loſt one eye, all above mentioned a 
ſignificd, will befal him but in Part or 5 
. Moreover, thou mult * conſider, 
"the right eye fig nißeth the ſon, brothe 
and father, che kel the Nene, ſiſter a 
mother. To have three ot four eyes, to hi 
that determinet! 'to take 4 wife and hath 
v7 "children, and defirerh to have,” it is good. 
is alſo good to an oſurer,, for he fhatl hi 
3 great. "ſums . of money; but to him that o. 
tis ill: It adtnoniſhes the rich man to ket 
od guard to himſelf and His poſſtMons, | 


a 3. 


=. —_— - 7 — — 
* 
0 = 
Ng 


an ah 


155 o \- W 


N 


full 


real 


Hi Interpretation of Dreams. 28 
aſon of ſome fraud and ſecret deceit, But 
Mo a coney-catcher, and a fair woman, to have 
ore eyes is not good; for he ſbal] have mare 
yes which ſhall apprehend him, and ſhe ſhall 
ave many of her clients attacht about her. 

Yreover, if any one d-eameth that he hath 
1 yes in his feet or hands, he ſhall fo loſe his 
Woh on one (ile of his body, that the ſaid ſide 
all be diſeaſed, b.aten or hurt. I knew a 
Dan chit dreamed that his eyes fell into his 
ect, and he fell not blind. but mai ricd a!) his 
daughters to his ſervants. To have another 
ans eyes, ſignifieth loſs of fight > But fo e 
vow him whoſe eyes he thinketh he hath, _ 
e ſhall keep his child, or ſome other great 
realure of hi. 4; 


[i 


Of the Noſe. 

OR to have a ſair and great noſe is good 

to all; for it ſignifieth ſubtility of ſeaſe, 
proyidence in affairs, and acquaintance; with 
great perſonages. But to have no.noſe, fign- 
eth the contr ry; and to a ſick man, death; 
Wor dead mens heads have no notes. To have 
wo noſes is diſcord with his domeſtick kindred. 


"= Of the Cheeks, r 

O have the chceks fat and full, is good ſor 
all, eſpecially to Woman; but flat and 
F full. of wrinkles, nd heaveneſs. 


= 


4 


IX 


* 
3 * 


6 4RTITMEDORUS. 
„ Of the Jams and Lips KF 
THE jaws - repreſent cellars, ſhops, afin 
Other things accuſtomed to keep mot 
chandizes, or drugs; the lips repreſeifiai 
hole wh ch kiſs and cmbrace us, and wh Mr 
ate often about us, as wife, children, p 
rents allies, ſo that if the one or ih 
other ſecm to have any harm or miſchanc 
it ſignifieth u to us, that the affairs of cu 
kius folks are not in good plight. 
= . f the Beard. 

C To have a Beard long, thick, and u 


| handſome, it is good for him which 
curious to ſpeak weil, as an ambaſſador, a 
Orator, a Lawyer, a Phi oſopher, and fc 
thoſe who have a deſire to learn arts, « 
| ſriences. If a widow woman dreams ſh 
hath a beard, ſhe ſhall have an huſband 
which ſhall be kind and bountiful : if ſhe b 
married, then ſhe ſhall loſe her huſband, e 
be ſeperated from him, and govern her hou 
alone, as if ſhe were bcth huſband and 
wife together, if ſhe be not with child, or 4 
law; for if the firſt, ſhe ſhall have a ſon; iff 
the ſecond, ſhe ſhall perſevere in her opini# 
on, bearing a high mind, and regarding he 
| ” honour, as if ſhe was a man. To a your 
child, this dream figniheth death; but tc 
© him which is now in his youth beginningſſoi 


V, Interpretation of Dreams. 27 
> have a beard, it is a ſign he ſhalt riſe by 
mſelf, and put, himlelt. forward, of what 
tate ſoever he be. The beard falling, or 
t away, or by force plucked away by the 
ands of another, as it ſignifies loſs of pa- 
nts, ſo alſo i is hurt and dishonour, 


3 Of the Teeth. „ 
TE upper teeth ſignifieth the beſt kin- 
dred of the houſe, and the lower tecth 
ignifieth the inferiour: For you muſt kn, 
hat the month repreſenteth the houle, T | 
eth, inhabitants; thoſe of the right fige 
he men; the other, the women: or other- 
iſe, the right ſignifies the elder; the left, the 
ourger: ine. eye teeth, them of middle age, 
he great teeth the old folks. Wherefore, 
what kind of tecth ſo.ver a man dreams he 
Yoſl.th, he ſhall loſe ſome ſuch: Perſonage as 
hat tooth ſignificth. But when teeth ſig- 
ifieth loſs of goods, by the great teeth are 
eant hidden treaſures, by others a veſſel or 
ome other thing of little importance. To 
uch as are in dert, what kind of tooth ſo- 
; ever fall out, it certifies them that they ſhall 
iniquit themſelves: The teeth falling out a! 
het one bow, ſignifieth that the houſe ſhall 
und be forſaken and abandoned of all inhabitants. 


ta For ſuch as are ſick to dream that any tootb, 
WE ot without 


com. 


to have them cf lead or tin, it is alſo ſha 


= IX TIE DON US. 


vithout death: It wcre better for him 
'd:cam that he ſhould loſe all his Teeth, folf 
then he would recover the ſooner. For 
'S.rvant to have no Tecth, is a lign of liberty 
to Merchants, good Gain of their mercha 
due, charges and trafficks. Teeth which e 
ſcem to grow in ſuch Sort as if the one wou 
exceed the other, ſignifie Scdition in t 
Houſc ; or if they ſeem to move, though th 
tall not our. Thoſe which have black ** 
or rotten broken Teeth, and dream they lo 
them, ſhall be delivered from their evils ant 
anger. Alſo by this Dream, fome have lol 
their old Folks. To have Teeth of Gold, 8 
good for ſuch as ſtudy to ſpeak well; wy 
others, it is hurt in their houk: by fire; . 
others, ſicknels by abundance of choler. T 

have their Teeth of Wax, it is ſudden Death 


and diſhorour; of glaſs or wood, viole F 
death; of ſilver, you ſhall get Money. 18 
Eloquence: to the rich, it is great Expendf. 
in Hoſpitality and nect ſſary Proviſion. TY 
dream to loſe his teeth, and recover othe 
5 change of eſtate into good or evil, accorc 
ing to the quality of the teeth. To dream th 
his teeth are in his hand or boſom, is loſs e 
children. To grate his Teeth a 1 hi 
tonęue, is to end his Pains and mi ; : 


1 


1 


9 


— 


* : 


«© 


His Interpretation pf Dreams. 29. 
| mien , blood ; and of cbolerick and, 
melancholy bumours. | 
OR to vomit much blood, and of a good. 
Colour, is good fur him which is poor, - 
ir he, ſhall get ſt re of money. It is allo 
cry good for Pian which ha h no Children; 
0 .whoſe kindred are in a ſtrange Coun- 
: The firſt ſhall ſee a. Child of tis own | 
other bis Kindred returning home. To 
555 blood is not gocd for him tnat would be 
idden. To vomit corrupt blood is ſicknets 
*"Þ all. To caſt a little blood in ſpittir g, 
Fretells ſedition; as 1 have known b bo, Ex- 
Frleoce. To vomit Phlegm (be the Humour 
holerick or melancholy) is good for him 
hich is in Mifſcry, anguiſh or ſickneſs, for 
' foretells an end of all his evils. To vo- 
ait Meat ſignifieth hurt. Alſo to vomit his 
Heels foretels the Death of Children, to 
ather and Mother; and to them which 
ave, no Children, the loſs of the deareſt 
ing they have among we, Goods z 0 
ck perſon it is death, — I 
"Of the rect, e bew many Head: Tus 
VERY Suruncle, Malady,” or Tap 50 ft Qi: : 
on about the Neck, head ag bean, 
Seth ſickac's, indiffcrently to all. T 
ave two or three heads is good for him 
ee ee af 
B 3 goods 


* 


30 IRT THE DO RUS. 


— 


goods, and alſo ſhall have a' wife and children 
of good nature: to a rich man it bgnificth 
_ adverſity by means of his kindred. 


Of being Behgaged. 


1 O dream that he is beheaded; whether 
-juſtly or otherwiſe, is ill to him which 
hath a, father, mother, and children ; for he 
ſhall loſe them. Some alio having had this 
dream, have loſt their wives, friends, and 
farms; and others having houſcs, have loſt 
them: And he which hath all theſe things, 
ſhall not have good luck with them all, (as IK 
have known by experience,) he ſhall ad es 
- that which is Ap pinot and which h 
ſhall eſteem moſt dearly. This dream is gooc 
for him which is ere of any crime, and i 
in danger of death: But to changers, Uſu- 
yers, maſters of galleys, or merchants, and al 
ſuch-as gather money it ſignifietb the loſs of 1 
ſum of money. This dream is good for deb 
tors. He which is in a far country and hat ha 
this dream, ſhall return into his own, He 
which is in ſuit for his inheritance, ſh: all ob- ir 
tain his ſuit : But incaſe of were is. 
* be hall be overthrown. A, g eK 


m e N 9 0 nd 


2 Ka R to have the head turned ſo that Va 


looks backwards, forewarns one not told 
0 out of his — Þ- and to enterprize no 
; — , 3 2 8 % 


— 


Hi Interpretation f Dreams, 34; 


Fairs, let the iſſue be bad. They Loy 
eina far country ſhall return home. NY 


To have the. Head of any Beaſt. 
DO have the head of a lion, a wolf, a pan- 
ther or elephant, inſtead of his own Tak 
Hood : For he which attempteth th: 
ond his power, and h.th this dream, ale at- 
zin unto great dignicy and -honour: Many 
efiring offices and placcs of credit, after this 
ream have obtained them. To dream you. 
aye the head of a dog, horie, or aſs, or ſuch, 
pur footed beaſt, is ſervitude, pain and miſery. 
To have a birds head, argues one ſhall not 
ay long in his country, 


To how his Mead between bis Hand. 
F one dreams that he hath his head be- 
tween his hands, it is good for him that. 
--Hath- neither w. fe nor children, and to hint” 
Bhat defireth the return of any one afar offs 
HAnd beſides if one be careful to comb and 
b-Frim his head which he ſeems to hold betweent © 
Vis hands, it is a fign that he ſhall diſpoſe well“ 
f his buſineſs, and have aa end of his evils: 
nd adverliti s. This dream ſignifieth thus 
it uch, if beſides that head which one holds 
tobn his hand, he ſeemeth to have another na- 
nofural head of his own; elſe not. {0 8 


rs, The 


. 


= ARTIMEDORYS. 


To have borns. 


don to dream have ox "horns, © 
any other ſuch - ike violent be aſt, fore 
"Tels violent Death, and chiefly beheading, it 
being incident to horned beaſts. _ 


Of the foulders. 


J Houlders thick and. fi:ſhy are good to al 
Men, excepting them only that are im 
Nn To the firſt it ſignifieth muc 
ſtrength ang profper.ty ; to the other, tha 
they ſhall be long in captivity. If the Shoul 
ders be difeaſed, lean or troken, it fignifi 
eth the contrary. to all beforefaid ; ard often 
times faretels the death or ſickueſs of brethren : 
Of the Breaſt and the Dag. WF 
A by have the breaſt whole, is good, as al * 
fo to have it hairy, is a ſign of gain mh, 
Men, but to Women it foreteis Widowhood 
The Dogs fair and without any evil is good 
and if they ſeem more groſs, yet by good 
means and grace they ſignfie Children ande 
Poft-ſfions to come; but if they be ſorr, as full 
of Ulcers, it is fickneſs to come. The Dug 
falling is deach to her Children that dream 
10 3 e if le have none, it is poverty to di 
ſelf. To have many Dogs, thinking ſhe ſces 
them bigger than is uſual ro a Woman, figni- 5 
fieth ſhe fall follow the Trade of * kellg an aa 
2 ip 


* 


To be wounded in the Stamach by any 
dung men or women it denen. oo 


of the . 


TE * 2 fair and firong; WD... 


ſperity to Tradeſmen, To him which 
ars Arreſts or Impriſonment, this dream is 
-. You "muſt remember that we ſaid 


ch out 


the Son, the left the Wife, the Mo- 
, the Siſter, and Strvant; the right fig- 

ifierh ſuch Goods as are to get, 2 left 
3oods already gotten. If therefore © one 
treams that he ſoſeth his right hand, he 
vill loſe ſomething which it ſignifieth. In 
general the Hands fignifies neither good nor 


ſome part, ſignifies burt or loſs of Scr. 
rants. To Scriveners, Orators, and Attor- 


MWcys, it hanificth that  t=cy. ſhall. want Im- 


more than they OWe : * To Uſurers loſs by 


no Fingers, and he 'was attached by a Cre- 
ditor that lent him money without an Obli- 
vention. To have more fingers than ordina- 
may, Gignifteth the contrary, namely, to owe 
th and not 10 pay + Some *( though” geceivad 
upp B 5 have 


rey ihe right band ſignified the Father 


bad z to loſe all the | erik of the - Hand, - 


Ployment: To Dchtors, that? they ſhall pax 


| oecreſt., I know a man that dreamt he had. 


His Interpretation" of Dreams. 32 | 
rake is ill news to old Women: and ta 


ng." * 


34 AR'TITMEDORUS. 
have thought this a good dream, but it is the f 
contrary ; for he that hath more fingers than 
natural, thinks and finds it ill: and if tne 
over - plus fingers are idle, they make their n 
riddle. To have hair which clives to the 
joints, is captivity; but if it cometh on the 

| palm of the hand, it is idleneſs, eſpecially to la- 
bourers and artificers. P-ofþ- -y 4 
To have many hands is good for an ertificer, 

or handicrafi-man ;. for this dream tells him ex- 
preſly. thou ſbalt have ſo much work, that thou} 
ali have need of many bands; and to good men 
alſo it is good, for it tells them they ſhall get 
children, ſervants, or money; as I have known 
by experience : but to wicked men it is capti- 
vity, and that ſome ſhall lay their hands upon 


them. l 1s | Lf 
0 the Ribs and Nauill. 
'A LL the #1ibs, ard the inner- ſide of the — 
Leliy, containing the bowels, to the privi- 
fes, is AHrengib of body, and abundance of 
| goods and riches: if they ſeem diſeaſed, they a 
finifie diſeaſes of the body and conſumption of 
the purſe. The navil is loſs of farher and mo- 
tber to ſuch as have them, and to others baniſh- 
ment. | | 9 


00 the inward Parts. _ 

6. 444 | RP - 35 | 1 Ei 1” 39 | $4 2 
F you dream you are dead; and ſee your 
inward parts according to their natural 
£6 Hh en eracr, 


1 


PR 
"Wc 
894 


= 3 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 35 

cr, it is gag to him that hath no abildres, © | 
Ind co him which is peer: for the one ſhall, 
ave children of his own, and the other riches. 
f his own. But to a rich man, and him 
hich would be cloſe, it is ſhame and diſ- 
Honour. It is evil to all, when they dream 
Bhat their intrails are ſeen of others, for it be- 
pkeneth troubleſome affairs, ſuits in law, and 
credit, But if he dreams he is opened, and 
et ſceth not his rails, it ſignifieth to him 
orfaking of his bouſe, loſs of children and 
Peath by + fcbneſs. It is alſo comfort for him. 
at is in miſery, for he which loſeth thole - 


et 

on Parts which . pain and grief, ſurely he 
i- Mall be delivered oat of diſtreſi, Moreover we 
on muſt think, that the hear; ſignifieth man, 


nd the husband of the ſame woman that ſhall 
dream thereof, it is a wife of the ſame man 
and the bushand of che ſame woman that ſhall 
dream thereof, it is a wife of tne ſame man 
at dreams it: likewiſe alſo the Jungs.” But 
he liver ſignifieth the ſon, food and. the Fog, 1 the 
pall, cholerick and melancholly humours, money, | 


of f men, or wives: the ſpleen, pleaſure, laughter, ' 
4 and veſſel; the Belſy and guts, children, for they 


'7 for meat; likewiſe they ſignific Rſerers. 
us ſignifie brothers and couſins. 


þ Of the Members. | | 

IRS T the members ſignifie the father and the 
le. the chilren, the wife, the friend, 

EE). the 


T. 


46 AR TIMED ORD 


the brother, and roufins ; allo. te fore of the 
body, eloquence and AHnotulkdgr, lör it is v 
| ee Again it Ggnifieih riches and pale 
on] becauſe it increaſetir and diminiſhetb. Al. 
ſo counſel-apd ſecrets, * alſo and ſervitude. - 
Alſoit fighthcth dignity and incrcaſe of honour; e 
and therefore when one dreams he feeth it 
in its eftate and place, it ſignifieth permanence 
of things repreſented and ſignificd thereby; 
alſo increaſing, diminiſhing and rcdoubling 
of things preſent to all, onty your wife, and 
| your friends excepted; for it takerh them a · 
| way, b-cauſe a nan may not impart their 


uſe to any 

Of the Grain and Thighs. | 
THE Groin ſigaificth the fame. things as ©. 
- the Members precedent : In like manner; 
3 the 7 gb. except when they foretel ſma 


je to the rich, or rather expence in n | 
a - Hcafures with loſs and burt. 


| 853 Of the Knees, | 

b Tur Knees being ſtrong and ſturdy, FI 
B he Journeys or other motions and opera- 
| tioas of Health: but being weak and diſcaſedf 
th: contrary: A tres or branch coming out 
of the Knee, fignifieth /owneſs and hi drance 
to a ſtk man oftentimes death. The knee; ſig J 
| nifie.the brethren and famuliar Finn and 


fo netimes children. 


0 . 


Es Trbterpretation ria. of. 
y the ſmall o the by, the fret and the. beets... 


2 femall of the Ig! the feet, and OW 25 
have as it were the fame Fgnificarion'as | 
e te. To have many feet, is good for 
Wrchants and maſters of fps, for they ſhall. 
mmand many men: and it fignificth reſt to 
> maſter himſelf. This dream is good for 
poor man ; to a rich it i fickneſs, Manx 

by this dream have loſt their U, and _ 
ralefaors having it, have been A 
o put their feet in the fire is HI to, and figat. 
th loſs of goods, children and ſerv : : But 
o ſuch as undertake a wager of running, it is 
zood, for they ſhall run ſwiftly, as if they had 
re en their feet. Alſo if one dream that he 
ath Joſt his foes, and goeth barefoor, it 


jgnifics that be ſhall have pain in his feet: 
no ſome it betokeneth much /fickneſs in bed. 
Likewiſe to dream that one would fain run, but 


Kannot, means that his Affairs ſhall be An 
ni = hard to accompliſh, 


ſed | Of the back. 


TE back and all the hinder part Ganifies 
124 old age, therefore as one thinketh his back 
und and hinder Parts to be, ſo — de in * 
188 


OfN® | 
= 
bs > * J 
; " , ". 
" Ts 
. 
* 


4 * ARTIMEDORUS. 


; _ Of Tranſmutation of the Perſon. 
| be changed from little to great, an 
from great again to be bigger, 85 that yc 
Exceed not reaſon, is good; for it is increaſe of 
buſineſs and goods: but to be greater tha 
common uſe, is death. Alſo it is ill for an old 
man to be changed into a young man, or 
young man into a child, for they ſhall change; 
do a worſe eſtate; but the contrary is good, 0 
for they ſhall come to a better eſfate, To dreanſſe e 
to be a woman, is good for a poor man, and a 
| ſervant, for the firft ſhall find thoſe which will, 
|. cheriſh hm as a women, and the ſecond ſha - 
have leſs pair: but to a rich man it is ill, eſpe · Id 
cially if he have government of any publicl 8 
thing, it taketh away his office and authorityher 
becauſe women muſt keep the Bou, To ſuchp t 
as <xcrcite bodily labour ir is fickneſs, for womenſy 
are commonly weaker than may. If a womanke: 
«+ dream that ſhe is a man, and ſhe be not mar nd 
; og ſhe ſhall have an husband, or if ſhe haveſke; 
. children, ſhe ſhall have a /ox, or ſhall b 

changed into the nature of a man: 
| 4 if f the be both married and have a ſon, 

. ſhe ſhall be a widow. To a maid-ſervant it ſig- 

nifieth ſhe ſhall have great ſervitude, and un-Hiſe 
dergo pain as a man: it is good for an Harlot, forſo: 

| ſhe ſhall leave her wicked courſes. Again, if aþor 
| poor man or woman dream that they are madeþyy 
AN. | all 


* 


nit 


3! 


At Tatefpretation'df Dreant. 39 
of Gold, they ſhall be gich; but if they be 
eb they ſhall be circumvented; for gold and 
ver have no ſpies. Lo a fick perſon it is death. 
o be of braſs good for a Warrior and a ſer- 
Wont; for the one ſhall have victory and a 
aue erected, and the other ſhall have. Sberty. 
o dream that you are of iron, foretelleth in · 
nite miſeries. To be of. earth, betokenetn 
ub, Except ſuch as live by earth, as Potters. 
o be of Fong is to receive blows and wounds, 
one dream he is changed into the ſhape of 
beaſt, he myſt judge according to the beaſts 
uure, and of that I will treat in the ſecond 
dok, in my diſcourſe of the chaſe. I have 
pe · pierved, that it is good for all to dream they 
icke fair, and of good grace, and ſtrong, and 
I)er” without exceeding common cuftom, for 
Ic be too fair, too brave, and too ſtrong, is as 
nennuch as to be ill favoured, faint-hearted, and 
atheak ; which things ſignifie death to the ſick, 
arJng to lovers ill ſucceſs, and attachment for 
Welreaſon, 7 


Of Arts, Works, : or Exerciſes. 


d: 
yall 


De 


an: 
, / Hoſoever in his dream ſeemeth to do 
18 that which he hath learned and exer- 


1N-Fiſed, ſhall have good ſucceſs, and is very good 
forſo all; foretelling, that all ſball come to ho- 
f afour by his buſineſs and enter prize; but if in 
def our dream you have not good iſſue, it ſigni- 


- - if he nd himſelf: hindered, 


a 41 MEDORHS. 
feth'the contrary. M one i» his dream doth 
that which he hath not learned, arid it hat 1 
good iſſue in his dream, then it is good; bus 
3 and Cannot ri 7 vil, 
i ro good, it is anger; and let of buſſneſs untiſor 
he — cue To play the heſbindman c = 

im mo keketh a wif, or wheek hat ; T 
_ ehildren 5 fer the d is his wife, the ſeed$Þ |: 
and trees his children, the whcat- males, by $00 
bartkey females and abortives';z © but te othe qua 
this dream betokereth fickneis and anger: II y. 
any one be ſick in the houſe where this dreainþ"4 
is, it betokeneth death ; for the ſeed and plant th 
are put in the earth as (hb: Dead. To reap, Pon 
Eut, ta trim vines, and to plough againſt har a] 
veſt, betokens that your affairs and — "ſhall" / 
be deferred til che aceuſtomed time of doingfl © 


1 


b them: But if the horſes ſeem to fink inte the* 


| of: huſbandry ſcem tuddenly- to be loſt; if 


'S 


ground, or that the ſpade, or other inſtrume 


betokeneth loſs of labour, dearth to cor Li 
and ill harveſt weather. Likewiſe, if an) 8 
huſbandman dream that he is ploughing on Af 


kill, and that on a ſudden he is looſing: the a 


horſes, and ſetting them up in the table, il 
betokeneth lofs by ill huſbardry ; and * 
that the Horſes ſhall not ſtand, but fall ſick in 
- the Stable. Ta govern #ſhip, ifone rcp 
„, and honour without ck as 


* 
* 


His Interpretation of Dream, 42 
oil dat it be without doubt or pin, it is good: 
it ut if one be troubled with tempeſt, or if. the 
bu@/ be broikd and broken, it is abup dance of 
Imp ws which I have often known by experience z 
tiger to dream of one that is in a water-mi:l, ſig- 
 oaltificth much buſineis; and the water held- ng 
4&ack,. fortelleth much trouble and difficulty 
n the performance thereof. To cut and faw- 
edda leather, to married folks is gocd : It is alſo 
chehood fer him which would marry, or get ac- 
exMuaintanc: and allics, by rcaſ.n of cloſe and 
\ T&>yncd ſeams. But to die eatbers is ill to all, 
mind reveal. th ſccreis. If one in his drcam ſcem- 
nth to go on narrow banks and ridg s of 
etebouſes, it is ill, for it fi anificth - decay and. 
ar haling into Poverty. Alſo to dream of an ping 
Allr Bing, betoken.th much trouble 185 at- 
nol ction: but to ſce medici nes is worſt of all. 
— lo be a Goldſmith, fignifi.th harm to bim 
Phi h drcams it, by re 1 of poiſon and in- 
Pruments thi.t they hindle. © To be a graber, 
Verner ot tarver: of images and figures, it is 
n Bood for adulterbrs, pratlers, cozeners,. a d 
n Ncefver s; becadſe cheir arts ſhe w o her eff cts 
an the ti ue. Uto otheis it ſignifieth boner ;, 
For ſuch works are ſhcwed unto many. BY 


e | CF 


- OR E L in Iron, and ſtrike upon the © | 
Ls hgnfieth noiſe and ſuits in LN] 
nat . | P tne 


J 


— 


* 


ces in important affairs. Alſo to travel over P 
bigh hill and mountains, and rocky places, 
S fignificth advancement, but with much diffi- rot 

culty obtained: notwithſtanding, 


right way, it betokeneth ſome friends that will. 
© be helpers o him. 


underſt and, that it fignifteth as much to ſee 


profit, marriage, or alliance, but ro ſome 
* hinderance of voyages: thoſe which ſcowre 


T O learn the Letters is good for the ig- 5 


— 


1 ARTIMEDORUS. 
the like we muſt judge in all other arts, offer 
the perſons which dream them. And we muſt eo 


the tradeſman working in their ſhops and 
tools, as to ſee himſelf uſe the ſame art. Not- 
withſtanding there is difference between tools, 
thoſe which cleave and break, ſignifie diſcord; 
and hurt, thoſe which unite and bind, ſignifie 


or ſmooth, appeaſe ſtrife: thoſe which addreſs 
and. compaſs, ignific revealing of rr 
you aw fo ſee in Geometricians. | 


Of Travelling. 1 

FF. any one dream that he is a travelling 
through a wood, and that he ſticketh in 
the why and buſhes, this dream is evil, forf 
it betokeneth many troubles and hinderan- 


if he meet 
with any one that ſcemeth to giret him the 


Of the Letters. 


norant; for ſome will betide them, þ 
but with labour and fear. But to lim which 
9 | rs knows] 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 43 
Orows the Letters, to learn them again isnot' _ 
uitF-od; for it is part of a child to learn; now 
lee gaifieth to him hinderance of affairs, and 
nal iſſue: only it is good for him which de- 
Ot gretn to have a ſon; for not he, but his fon 
Is, hall learn. If a Grecian dreameth that he 
rd tarneth Latin Letters or on the contrary, 
fie ay Reman the Greet Letters, they ſhall travel 4 
NeInd go from the one country to the other. 
TeMany Romans by th.s dream have had Gre- ; 
elan, and as many Grecian Romans to their 
as Vives. To read well and truly Barbarian' 
sc ſtrange Letters, ſigniſie that they ſhall go 
| ito that country, and have goods and ho- 
ng out there; but to read badly ſignifies the 
in lontrary: or that the ſick man ſhal] enter in- 
or lo fooliſhneſs and frenzy, by reaſon of the 
n- ſavage and ſtrange ſpeech, which a raving 
er n ſpeaks. Al Letters of any Language, 
WP N ich, one cannot read, ſignifie anger and 
n- wuble for few days, if the writing be lide's; | 
et pat for longer time if it be much, 


/ Plays and aftimes. 

0 play Ye Pl Top 55 pain and travel, 
 wheteof notwithſtanding hall come 
ro 1 or to run, or to dance, ani: 
8 eth proſperouſneſ in affairs: but to dance 
N, ei thout muſick, ſoretelleth want of money. 
ſo 0 * * play at Tennis, 2 long 

Ens. .. noe 


=. — FEY i yy 4 | | - | 
44 4 RTIMEDORUS.. 
ngiſe, and quarrels, and often betokegetn love 


towards a whore, tor the ball re pre ſents the 
whore, b: cute it hath no ſtay, and it goet 


through the hands of many. 


O plays, games and inſtruments. _ 
F any one dreameth of the . trumpet; td 
them which would fight, 'tis good, and 
to thoſe which have lot th: ir Servants. But 
it reveal. th ſ-crets, by reaſon of the geen 
found, and it killeth the ſick : Alſo to Ser- 
vants it promiſeth liberty. But to wind 2 
horn is ill, and forbiddech to undertake any 
law ſuit. Every inſtrument which one may 
blow, lignifieth, trouble. To dream that you 
pla the public cryer, may, be interpreted as 
to ſound the trumpet; to play upon à reed, 
or upon a bag pipe, is good to all. To. ling 
and play upon the, hup, at Offering; and 
5 ſaci, is good for weiidings,, aod. contract 
ing of affnity.; but it s ill for other Affairs, 
= to many it ſignifie ih che Gout, h. cauſe of cords 
and nerves, To play or ſee played tragedi. s, 
f gnificth travel, fighting, injury, and a thou- 
L- ſand Evilsz but to play metry plays, is a Mert. 


Kl 


: . 


N 
13 
Ld 
= . 


— Yom; affairs 3 and to hear. ioging, ſigni- 
Receptions) 05 50,012 0% „ e &f 
ren: Of riding. N his dr 
4 ride a hotſe nimbly, is good for all; 
for th | horſe ſignifies 3 Waman, or a 
— 245% | a . Fr end 


7 
— 


93 


> Bs — Dell | 45 "4 


ried, the Ship, the M-ficr and gvy'd: to 
Kovern, and the good friend: So 103 as he 
Naas his horſ- well, ſo ſhall be do al this. 


to a ſick perſon it s drath; as alſo to a 
hariot of four wheels, To ride a hoi ſe thro? 
e town is good for him which underiaketh 
o play a prize, and to a ſick Man; for tbe 
dne- ſhall gain the prize, and the other ſhall 7 
de hea ed ; but to ride out of Toun is quite 
ontrary. For one to dream that he rideth 
Ppon a wild herſe, if he be able to govern 
Fim, and to keep the ſadd e, it is gooi; for 
is dream ſignifies rule and dignity; but if a 
e fall or be throw n out of the ſadule, it is ill, 
ignifieth diſgrac, di ſponour or N proach. | 
To lead or guide cnari::ts through woods and 

d. 2 fignifieth death to all at hand, - 


Of the race. 


to 
nd 


* OR to ron is good to all, except to ſick 
al perſons, when they dream they come 
2 to the erd of their race z for it ſi gnifith h 
ul. hat — oy: ſhall come to the end of their 
488 
ni 


2 b put out of office. =» . 
F any one dreams he is 7 rl, ti | 
place, tflate, and dignity It is ill to all, aggd 

8 e ſach as are fick, i 2 


ad — l 4 


— Wn 


he carthgnificth as much as tie horſe, but 


146 AR FI MED. 0E US. I 
f e lu 
Fon to wreſtle with any party Geng th tr * 
with him. And among ſuch as are at ſtrif'® 
- alrcady; he which dreameti that he is ſuper 
our, ſhall vaniſh, if. they ſtrive not ſor heritaę 
for in ſuch a controveriie, it were better to Pa 
beaten. To wreſtle with a ſtrar ger, is dang 
of ſickneſs. If a man fight with a child, and e 
3 throw him on the ground, he ſhall loſe ilſen 
| _ -ſzme frieod by death: It he be beaten, he ſhaP®© 
have mockery and ſickneſs. It is good for * 
little child to wreſtle with a man; for he ſha 
do great matters more than one would think nre 
but if he wrcſtle or combate with a champio at 
this dream is not god for him. To wreſtf* 
with d ath betokereth ſickneſs or debate, anf 8 
ſuits in law with the chil ren or heirs of deaf®? 
men. But it is good always for the rich maf* 
to think or dream that he is in authority. 


Of Combaling. 

F OR to combat with any one, is ill to * 

men; for beſides ſhame, he ſball hay 

8 hut. Likewiſe it ſignifieth much ſtrife a Fai 
cContention: And to be wounded in fight bp b 
tokeneth ſhame and diſhonour. Notwithith 
ſtanding it is good for ſuch as live by blooqak 
| Thed, as ſurgeons, butchers, and cooks. -. o 
To Baibe, and go into the Hot-houſe. p fl 
OR to waſh and bathe himſelf in baths anke 
hot- houſes, Ggnifieth riches and prol perifill « 


al 


re 


d 


Ld . 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 47 
Ind health to the ſick, But to waſh and bathe 
-@Þimſelf contrary to the common uſe, as in his 
ri oaths, is cvil; and betokeneth fickn-is and 
erpreat anger. It is ill to a poor man, if he be 
800 Couragious to waſh himſelf, and it he have 
> any wh. ch rub him, for it fortellech long 
g ekneſs. In like fort it is evil to the rich, if 
Ie be alone, and have no body to aid him. In 
general, it is bad for all not to ſweat, or to ſee 
habe bath in an cpen place, or to find no water 
or it. In brief, it is very ill, when it is other- 
ſnahiſe than cuſtom, for it ſignificth ill iſſue of 
n{;Forerprizes and affairs. To be waſhed with 
ioFater naturally hot, is a ſign of death to the 
eftþck, of hindrance. of affairs to the whole. It 
an good to dream that you waſh in fountains, 
geaboods, and current waters, and in fair and clear 
maboods; but not to ſwim, for that were a ſign 
danger and ſickneſs. 
„„ „% Äçꝙ·  - 0b | X 
oO drink cold wat:n, is good to all, but 


hay hot, fgoifieth ſickneſs and hindrance of 4 


 anfffairs. , To drink wine with reaſon, and not 


- bþ be drunk is good: but to drink much, and 


vithithout reaſon, ſignifieth much evil i alſo it 
ooqakes you be in the company of drunkards. 
| To drink ſweet wine, or to ſee fair women, or 
) flecp under ſhady trees, to him that would 


5 anjke a wife, it betokeneth a good ſucceſs in love. 
erigll compounded wines and portions mann 
Ly * 


a . , * 


er- 
* \ - 


#8 ARTIMEDORTS. 


otherwiſe than naturally, is good for rich me 
becauſe of heir delicacy : But it is evil 
r folks, which never drink them but 
| kncfs. To drink urine, ſignifieth ſickne 
= - - 200 to drink oyl ſignifieth poiſon or ſickneſ 
{ _ Tothirſt and find no drink neither in wel... 
fountains nor rivers, is ill, and a ſien w_ 
finiſh his buſineſs 3 tut the contrary is 
If one dream that hz is drunk or fick, he th 
be born withal, as ſuch Perſons are: Mor 
bodouer to driak in veſſels or tinkards of gol. 
ſilver or earth, is good for all, by reaſon of t * 
lid matter and ate: of the veſſels, which f A 
nifie t1anquility.® Alſo © veſſels of horn 4 
good, for they burſt not; veſſels of glals a 
© evil, becauſe they break eaſiily ; they alſo 
vesl ſ erets, by reaſon of their tranſparer.c 
other wiſe thefe veſſe!s may ſiignifie our frie 
which we embrace; when therefore th: va 1 
ſels are broken, it ſiignifieth the death of ſorf aq 
of our friends or affinity. I know by exp. 
*ence, that to dream to fee a glaſs broken, ſ m 
nifieth ſhipureck to Marin rs. There 1 
\ccrtain'veſT |s with ftrait nouchs, Which if c he 
'Thall ſce broken, they fignifie end and iſue i © 
+bukitions and anguiſh, tir 
Of berbs, roots and grains in postage. F 2 
ILL herbs and roots which dive ſro I 
ſmell in catipg, reveal ſcerets, and fip al 


bes anger, wie all ber a ttendanec. That wh 4 


— wu - 
* * 


dil 
; 


< 


| 


| His Inlerpretacis en 0 Bran. 49 
eaten raw, as lettice, ſorrel, purſlane, and 
others, ſignifies trouble and difficulty in the 
anagement of affairs. 

To dream of eating medicinal- herbs, as 
dels, mallows, burrage, and the like, ſigni- 


ne 


| 
| 


duſincſs, becauſe they make the body ſoluble, 
To dream of eating coleworts ſignifi -s vex- | 
[ on. The French navew-gentle, and u- 
umbers, denote vain hope. Some are of 
71 e nion, that when ſick pariſons dream of 
Inelons or cucumbers, it is a prognoftick of 
| Fecovery, by rcaſon of their humidity. 


Of CORN, and other Grain. 


O dream that you ſce corn ehred, and ga- 
ther it ſignifies profit and r ches. : 

| To dream you ſee ſtacks of corn, ſignfiies 
rofit and abundance to the dreamer; and on 
he contrary, to ſce a ſmall quantity, Aenne 
mine neceſſiiy- 
To dream of eating white bread made ol 
heat, ſignifies profit to the rich, and damage 
d the poor; on the contrary, to dream of 
king coarſe bread, denotes to the poor, pro- 
and gain; ro che rich, loſſes. 
trol To dream of eating barley-bread, ſignifies 
2alth and content. | 
To dream of «ating broth is a good gn, 
id —_ Rn and gain. | 
| C 


2 
8 2 
- 
\ 


. C 
le 


ep: 


wh 


To 


es freedom from trouble, and expedition of 


| 5 ARTIMEDORUS. 


'' 

1 
1 
[1 
1 
. 


a 2 ſignifies, either that you ſhall .marry a 


And diſſention. 


of rice, de notes abundance of obſtruction. The 


Io dream that one ſees a barn ſtored with 


r ch Wife, over hrow your adverſary at law, 
" inherit land, or grow rich by trading or wives: 
it fignifi.s alſo binquetting or merry- making. 
- To dream of eat ng praſe well boiled, denotes 
ſucc.fs and expedition of buſineſs. . 
To dream of cating beans, ſign fies trouble 


- To dream of lentiles, fign fies corruption; 


millet, ſignifies poverty and indigence. 

To dre m you ſce or eat muſtard- ſeed, 
that is a bad ſign, unleſs it be to phyſicians, fl 
to whom ſach dream are aGVantagenus, tl 


 Jhe E AR T E. 


F any one dreams that he hath good land 

well It incloſed beſtowed upon him, with plea 
fant paſtures, he will have a handfome wife 
according to the ſeeming goodneſs of the land 

But it the land ſee med ſpacious and not in 
cloſed, that denotes pleaſure, joy and riches 
Gable to the extent of the land. | 

Inn ſeem that the faid incloſed lands had 
fair gardens, fountains, fields, pleaſant grove 
orchards adjoining thereunto, that ſigni 
-fies he will marry a diſcreet, chaſte and beau 
titul wife, ard that ſhe will bear bim var 
| kandſome children, | 


1 


A 
” . 
0 7 * 


His ont of mY 5 1 


17 he faw the land fown with wheat, that 
ſignifies Money and Profit, with care and in- 
"3 dunn 

If he bi ir ſown with any kind of pulſe, 
8. tas denotes affliction and trouble. bs 

If he faw it ſown with millet, that Genifies | 
vaſt riches to be gained with eaſe, and much Y 
le delight. 

K Ita man in holy orders dreams any ſuch | 
nel ching, then 1 it is taken for the riches and con- 

tentment of his mind. 

If you dream you ſee the earth black, that 

fignifies ſorrow melancholy, and weakneſs of 

the brain. 

To dream that you ſee the earth quake, ſig- 
Ivifies that your affairs and life are in danger 

of be ing loſt. | 

l To dream that the whole earth quakey fl 
diſies an edict from the king, that will en, 
ll the inhabitants of the kingdom. - N 

If you dream that the houſe ſhakes, i it is an 
dict imply agaipſt the houſe, tho? it preſages hy 
alſo loſs of goods, and ſuits at law. 1 
If the walls, doors, and top of the houſe fall 
MD) reaſon of the ea fo the ch that denotes de- 

ruction and death to the chief perſons in the | 
iouſe. 
If a king, or any Aber prince, Jeans that — 4 
palace or throne is overturned and borne 
C 2 | don 


fo — 


* 


SY 


$22 ARTIMEDOR US. 
daun by an earthquake, he will ſuddenly. die, 
Ot loſe. his kingdom. | 
If any one dreams that a mountain is fallen 
upon a valley, that ſignifies that ſoms great 
lord will oppreſs and deſtroy good men. 
If any one ſecs a Town that he knows, ſunk 
by an earthquake, that is a prognoſtick of fa. 
mins, war and deſolation, by the indignation 
| | of a prince: but if he knows not the town, it 
p Ggnifies that the nation at enmity with the king 
+ . ſhall be d.ſtroycd by the ſame means. 0 
To dream you ſce great dttchs or precipices, 
ani that you fall into them, ſignifics that he 
that dreams will ſuffer much injury, and hazard 
his periſ en, and his be in danger by fire. 
Io dr.am of kiſſing the earth, ſiznifics ſad- 
— þ TY ORE 
To dream of beieg in a meadow, is a good 
ſizu to huſbindmen and ſhepherds; snd to 
others, it denotes oòdſtructien of buſineſs. 
=” To dream that you are in a fair, ſtraight, ! 
W level and pleaſant way, ſignifi-s joy, proſperity, 
W. and ſucceſs; and a bad way the quite 
contrary. Zong 8 
=. Of VeorTATIyE Creatures. 
_ - Of FLOWERS. 
= HERE are three forts creatures; the 
= vegetative, the ſenſative, and rational 
The dreams of which three we will ſuccefſivi) 


handle one after another. 
2 , / | VUnde 


* * — : : 
* 


"His Fa del on of Drone. 53 


| Vader the vegetative creature- is comprized 
trees, plants, flowers and fruits, that receive 
their nouriſhment, vigour, growth and matu- 
rity froom the earth and ſun. 

To dream of holding or ſmelling odor: ferous 
flowers in their ſcaſon, ſignifics joy, pleaſure 
and conſolation. 

To dream cf ſeeing and ſmelling flow rs - 


out of ſcaſon z if they are white, that ſig afhcs 


obſtruct on in buſinefs, and bad ſucceſs in his 
enterprizes z if yellow, the impedim-nt will not 
be ſo conſiderable ; and if they be red, the diffi= © 
culty and nuſance will be extreme; and for the ; 
beſt part it ſignifieth death. 08" — 

To dream of ſecing and ſmel'ing alle s in 
the ſ-aſon of: the year, is a good ſign to all 
perſons, except thoſe that are diftemp-r*d, a 
who through fear conceals themſclvs ; for "they 55 
are in danger of death or great ſickneſs oa. 
if the dream be when roſcs are out of feaſun, _ 
it fign:fieth the contrary. — 

To dream that you ſmell marjoram, by! op. 
roſemary, ſage, and other herbs of the ſame 
nature, ſignifics labour, trouble, ſadneſs and 
weakneſs, phyſicians only excepted, to whom 


ſuch drcams arc propitious. 
If any one dreams that he ſces, holds, or 
© ſmells to lillies out of their ſcaſon, it Bangs 
that the hope of the thing deſired wil be fruſ- | 
trated. 


3 - f 
. . . 


| 54 4RTIMEDORUS. 


Laurel, the olive, or palm; if ſhe be a woman, 


If one dreams that he ſees or ſmells upon 


ſhe ſhall b-ar children; if a maid, ſhe will be 
ſuddenly married: if it be a Man, it fignificg 
amity, joy, proſp-ri:y, abundance, and good 
ſucceſs in his enterpri zes. 


ARTIME- 


er ene - gow . 


2 


fl © 


n ard nor ſtopped, 


4E. MEDORUS” 
His Expoſition of 5 


D R E. A M 8. 


The Second | Book. 


_ — 3. 22 13233 3 * 
- 


To watch. 5 


Ke Dream that in the Night one watch-' 
eth in a Chamber, ſignifieth to the rich 
great affairs, to the poor, and thoſe that 

would ule any ſubtilties or deceits, it is good: 
For the firſt ſhall not be without work and gain, 
and the others undergoing their attempts with 
great ſubtilty, ſhall come to the 7 of their | 
enter prize. | 


To go out and (a {alute ene. 6. 


| dream that you are going out of che 
Houſe in the pr and are not hin- - 
is good; for it ſignibeth 
your buſinefs ſhall have a good iſſue: But not 
to be able to get out, nor find iſſue out of 

the Houſe, is hindrance to thoſe that would 
travel, and imp:achment of affairs, and long 


fickneſs to the ſick. To falute his familiar 


friend, to ſpeak to him, and embrace him, is 
youu z for it fignifieth that you ſhall ſp-ak and 
heat <_ news; but if they be hot our very 

C 1 my | 


56 ARTIMEDORUS. 
WU  familiars, but only ſimply known to us, th 
dream is not fo gocd : If they be our ene 


friendſhip with them. To kifs the dead, to 

bim that is fi-k, it fignifieth death: To him 

* which is in health, it forbids him to ſpeak of his 
affairs at that preſant, becauſe he hath kiſſed 
the mouth of the dead : Notwithſtanding, i 
the dead party hath. been our pleaſant and pri- 
vate friend, it hindreth not a whit, either to 
ipzak or udertake any thing. 

Of the Apparel in general. 
HE Habits accuſtomed and agreeable to 
| the ſeaſon, are good; as iu Summer an 
Habit of Linnen Cloth, and fine Wool; in 
Winter a new Garment and of ſtrong Wool, 
ST To him only which is at Law, and which ss a 
| - Servant deſiring liberty, new Apparel is bad; 
| becauſe he muſt have long time t@ uſe them, 
and refuſe thrm again. A white garment is 
good only to Prieſts; to others it ſignifie h 


& , trouble :'to Mechanicks it ſignificth they ſhall 
have no work; it alſo revealeth Malefa&tcrs; 


- 


= to the fick it is death; but the black Garment 
ie is health. Notwithſtanding J have often 
"ſeen poor men, ſervants, and Captives, having 
dream; d they were attired in black, die. This 
black Habit is bad, except it be to them 
which would do ſecret things. To have a Gar- 


3201 


ment 


mys, it ſignificth that we ſhall enter into 


 wng mA npSDp n 2 2. 


th 


nc 


His Interpretation of Dreams, 57 
ment of divers colburs or ſcarlet, for prieſts, _ 
jeſters and ſtage players, it is good ; to other» - 
it ſignifiech troubles, dangers ard revealing 
of ſecrets ; to the ſick it is, they ſhall be tor- 
ment d with ſtrang and abundant humours. 
A robe of ſcarlet to ſervants and rich men is 
good, ſignifying lib-riy and honour, or digni- 
ty; it killeth the ſick, and bringeth greater 
poverty to the poor: To many it hith fig nifi - 


ed captivity : For the man clad in purple or 


ſcarlet, muſt alſo have a diadem or a crown, 


and many about him to guard his body. Every 
ſuch robe died in ſcarlet, is io ſome hurts, 
others an ague. 1 1 
A woman's gown is good only to thoſe which 
have no wife, and which come upon ſtages to 
play. Others after this dream loſe their 


wife, or fall into great ſi kneſs, by reaſon of 


the del:cacy and effeminateneſs of thoſe which 
wear ſuch garments. And yet n«:twithſtand- * 


ing, in caſe of rejoicing and aſſembles, neither 


Gowns of divers colours, nor women's gowns 
are bad. To have a Gown of the faſhion. f 
a ſtrange nation, is good luck among ſtran- 
gers, to him wh.ch purpoſcth to go, or re- 
main, or lead his life among them; to others, 
ſickneſs and hindrance of affairs. To have a 
delicate and ſumptuous gown, is gcod fur 
rich and poor: For to the firſt, their pr. ſent 
proſperity ſhall continue; and to the other, 
| , C 5 5 - thiic 


$8 4RTIMEDORUS.” 
their goods ſhall increaſe. Broken and torn 
Gowns, is hurt and hindrance of affairs, , 
A coat, a jacket, or ſhort cloak, or ſkirt of 
woolen cloth, is anger, and loſs of a law- 
fult: wherefore it is better to dream you - loſe 
them, than you have them, But the loſs of 
any other habit is not good, except to the poor, 
 teryants, captives and debtors z . theſe gar · 
- ments. being loſt, argue loſs of evils which. in- 
compaſs them. For others, it is not good to 
dream of loſs or nakednelis ; for it ret 
| loſs of goods and pleaſant things. A. fair and 
| brave. gown, and of divers — is good for 
rich and joyful women; for the one keeps her 
drave for her pkaſures, the other, divers colours 
argue her profit, For to dream of ſhifting a 
irt or ſmock, or that the slothes are fallen 
from. the bed, doth ſigniße hard lodging: and 
much chifting in hs countries, It is always 
bdetter to dream to have good, fair, rica and 
garments, than lutle and dirty, except 


| . cleanly 
$ only 40 thoſe which exerciſe ſlovenly and dirty 
- trades. - 
Do dream one waſbeth bis garments. : 
& ws dream to waſh ones clothes, of another ® 


bodies, is to ſuſtain and lofe, or eſcape 
| Sore hurt and danger about the body or Hife; for 
clothes being waſhed lofe their uncleannefs. 
This dteam alſo ſheweth, that fore bedy 
ſhall learn and h our feerets : Eg ; 

8 Wa 


s Interpretation of Dreams. 59 | 


waſh, is to take and amend or correct, 
therefore it is an ill dream for them which are 
fin doudt to be reproved or ſurprized. | 


Of exterior beauties. 4 

Ris of Iron about one, do fionifie gods, 

but with labour. Alſo rings of g ld 
which have (tones, are good; for thoſe wh ch 
have no ſtones, ſignifie pair.s without profit. 
But always - maſſic and juil Rings are bet er 
than hollow, which fignifie deceit and falſho2d 
ard greater hope than profit. Rings of am- 
der, Ivory and ſuch like, are good oniy for 
women. Carcanets, chains, pearls, precious 
ones, and all adornings of the heads, and 
SY necks of women, are good for women; to 


widows and maids they ſignifie marriage; to | 


en thoſe which have no children, that they ſhall - + 
d have ; and thofe that have hufbands and 
ys Children, they betoken parchafes and riches': 27 
1d For as women are provid. d of thcſ: d: ckinzs, 
pt fo ſhall they be ſtored of  Husbands, Children 
ty and Goods. But to men this dream fenificth 
decent, craft and confuſion in accounts of mo- 
ney, not becauſe of the matter, dg oth lorth 4 
and faſhion. | 


' Of Gold and the loſs of Rings, ___ 

Or a man to dream he hath Gold, is. cl 
bad, becauſe of the mater, as evciy one * 

will ſay.z but contrary wiſe, it is good, as cg 


L -j 


haye 


$6 ARTIMEDORUS. 
have known by experience : But oftentimes, 
when one hath dreamed that he hath too 
mucn, or an exceſs, and ill-agreeing to the 
Sex, by reaſon of the faſhion and figure, as to 
men's habliments, chains and carcanets. It 
happeneth in like manner, as for men to 
dream of a crown of gold, and Plate, and 
great pieces of gold: For when any one ſhal| 
uwe ſuch-a dream, the gold fignifieth evil, 
not in reſpect of the matter, but the workman- 
ſn p and figure. But if the head tires b 
1:it, broken or bruiſed in the dream, it is 
loſs to a woman. If any one dream that hit 
- pockets arc ſullof money or gold, it betoken- 
eth that he ſhall reccive but hitle money. Andi 
if a man dreameih that he hath found gold, 
and he cannut tell where to liide it, or that hei w 
bath found a purſe of money, and is afraid 
to be taken with it, it b.tok-neth that he 
hall have lo,s by a Woman: Loſs of Rings tc 
a man, ſigaificth not only the Loſs of them 
that had charge over his Goods, as the Wife, 
mae Tenant, &c. but alſo the loſs of his gods, O 
lands and poſſeſſions; or that he will not cc 
Lend, or give away any more, to ſuch as hel as 
F hath lent, and committed charge to, as beforeſſi ol 
= times: To many, this dream hath foretold} fe 
Þſs cf eyes; for the eyes hath ſome agree - h. 
mont with the rings, by reaſon of the radianceſſ} h 
ol the ſtones, But when as your dream is — 0 
* a 0 0 


of Hoſe or Shoes, we moſt judge as of the 


apparel. 


TO dream to comb him or her ſelf, is good 
10 both to man and woman, for it fignifieth 
ad to go out of evil time and affairs; but to plait 
and curl his bairs, is good only for women and 
i, courtiers which uſe it; to others it is debt and 


n impeachment for money, and fomerimes im- 


» | priſoning and ſedition. 
Of the Looking Glaſs. - 


themſelves, according to their true 2 
is good for him and her nich would be marr 
ed”; for the glaſs repreſenteth to the Man, his 
wife, and to the woman her huſband > To 
thoſe which are married it betokeneth Chil- 


for it ſignificth that they ſhall ſoon paſs out 


Others by this dream have gone into a ſtrange 


as he is, ſignifieth he ſhall be made a father 
of baſtards, or other men's Children: But to 
ſee himſelf more ill favoured and deformed, is 


himſelf in the water, is death to the dreamer 
or ſome familiar friend of A. 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 61 


KOf- the Combing ones ſelf, and ef cried. Hair. 


O be before a Looking-glaſs, and to ſee b 


dren : It is alſo good to fad and afflicted people, 


of heavinels, becauſe heavy men look not in a 
glaſs. Bur this dream to the fick, is health. 


country. To ſee himſelf in the glaſs not ſuch 


Jheavineis and anger. Alſo to dream to ſee 


4 a 


. 


f | 


„ ARTIMEDORUS. 


0 be air, and that which in there din. 


IE air clear and pure, is good to all, chief. , 
8 --* ly 19 thoſe Which have loft goods, and 
Which would make voyages. The Air troubled 
and Cloudy, on the contrary, ſignificth hinder. 
ance and anger. Rain without great wind or 
tem peſt is good for all, except 10 thoſe which 
8 go intoa ſtrange country, and thoſe which have 
WW, 4bgir. vocation and work abroad without ſhelter, 
W Little rain and drops of water, is good for 
plow. men; to others it is little gain. Great 
Azmpeſtuous Rains, are troubles, hurts and 
dangers, except to thoſe which art ſervants 
Poor, and afflited ; for it argues ſhort delive- 
(nee from their preſent evils, as preſently af. 
ſudden. a Tempeſt cometh fair weather; 
d Ice ſeen in their ſeaſon, ſignifieth 
= - ic but that the Spirit, when the bodyſh.: 
= ſleeps; members the cold of the day. But oui 
of time and ſcaſoq, it is only good for plow Iz. 
men; to others not ; for it argues that thicif. © 
buſineſs ſhall go forward coldly, and forbids 
F them to travel. Hails are troubles and heavi-Þ 
deſs, and reveal Secrets. Thunder without 
= Lightning to ſervants trouble and falſhood : but. 
* *lghtning without thunder, vain fear, and 
without cauſe. To fee elementary fire, clean), 
pure and clear, not great nor thick, arc threat- bi 
enings to ſome nobles, and men of great eſtates. | 
" 26 TY But ; 


Hit Interpretation of Dreams. 62 


But large, fair and thick, is approach of ene- 
nies, poverty and famine. In what place ſo- 
ver the fire is, and from what place it comes, 
x it from the north, ſouth, caſt or weſt, from 
jar fide ſhall the enemies come, and about 
hoſe regions ſhall they run; or elſe there 
hall be famine : but yet it is worſe to dream 
hat he Carries the fire. To ſee in your dream 
orches and burning flames fall from heaven, 
igntfieth that wood-ſtacks, colonies, ane 
rees ſhall be burnt: Ic is alſo great and 
xtreme danger of life to him that dreameth 
t. Lightning without tempeſt, falling near, 
without touching the body, ſignifieth change 
bf place; falling be fore a man, forbids tra- 
ling. To be touched and ſmitten with 
Wightning, fuck a dream is good for thoſe 
hich would net have their ſin and poverty 
hidden, for others will reveal them: To 
he rich and mighty men adorned with great 
lignity, as that of a Scepter qr crown of Gold 
It is good; for the fire reſembleth the Gold. 
To others, this dream fignifieth loſs of Goods, 
Moreover, to thoſe which are unmarried, it 
ignifieth marriage, be they rich or poor; but 
Mt breaketh marriages made, and maketh 
reads enemies; for lightning looſneth, but un- 
tieth not. Thoſe that have children, upon 
bis dream ſhall, loſe them; for the Ie 
Jouched wick lightning, withers, and dan 
or 


64 ART TIMEDORUS. 
both fruit, flower and bud. To dream ra 
lightning, mak eth champions honourable, ani 
 gravccth orators, and all ſuch as would ſhe it 
themſclſves, and make appearance. Alſo it ol 
good for. him which is law, in caſe of hoffer 
nour and renown 3 though lofs in caſes of poſſind 
ſeſſions and *houſes'; bnt not loſs of Land nn 
them which poſſeſs it: to thoſe which pretenWut 
to take poſſeſſion it denies entrance. Al{qQnc 
it ſignifieth to him which is in a ſtrange count 
try, that he ſhall return to his own; and to hind | 
which is in his own, that he ſhall die thereſ$vil 
Tou muſt underſtand it is all one dream, i 
you are only touched on the head, or on thin 
Romach, or to be burned with lightning: buſh 
take heed left you dream you are all burneas 
and conſumed by the lightning, for it is deat 
to him which dreameth it: Alfs you mul 
know, that is not good to be ſcorcht witl 


x lightning, being with his face on the earth, offi 


lying on ones back, or being in a ſhip ; bu 
it is gocd be ſtanding on his feet, or ſiting in u 


1 royal and majeſtic ſtate. un 


= :.- Of Houſhold Fire. 
=. TO dream you ſee fire en the hearth, cleaſho 
= and little, is good, but much, is ill; Lit: 


and clear, is abundance of goods: Dead fire ii 

poverty, and if there be any one ſack in th 

houſe, it is death. To hold toi ches and fire 
* | | : brand: 5 


e 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 65 
* by night, is good, eſpecially to young 
ks, to whom moſt often it ſignifieth love, 
ith pleaſure and effect; but to ſee another 
Wold a torch, is ill to thoſe which would be 
Feret. A burning light in the houſe, clear 


d clean, is affluence of goods to the poor; to 
Mnmarried perſons, marriage; to the ſick, health; 


enWut an obſcure and troubled light, is heavineſs 
\ Ind death by ſickneſs. A light put out, is health 
unÞ the ſick, ſor ſoon after one will light again. 
nina lamp of braſs is either great goods, or great 


vils, according to the diſpoſition of the light. 
lamp of earth ſignificth leaſt hurt: The one 
nd the other reveal ſecrets: A lamp ſeen in a 
hip, is a ſign of great joy and OY to 
avigators, 


- a 


Of burning Houſes. | LEO 


WT Ouſes burning with a clear fire without 
t falling or diminiſhing, is riches to” the * 
$90" ; and the rich, bigher eſtate and dignity # 
But to the houſes which burn, or fall, or con- 
Yume, are ill to all, hnd ſignifie death of maſ- 
ers, children, ſervants, parents, or friends; in 
ke ſort trees burning before or within t * 
ouſe. The door of the houſe ſeeming to 
fre, is good to the good wife, and dan 
d him which dreams it. To kindle the | 
Falily in the oven or hearth, is a ſign of Ge» 
eration; but for it to go out ſtraight after, 
$ hurt, | * 


 * Much. as it is better to trouble than to by 


„ 


cclightand paſtime, = 
0 %% of all forts. 


66 ARTIMEDORUS. 


A Of Dogs and the Chaſe. 
| * RE hayes and gins, and all fuch Thing 

to enfnare and ſurprixe beaſts, are ill, u 
leſs to them that feeks ſervants run away 
and a thing loſt, for then it ſignifieth ſpeed 
recovery. It is better to {it and hold them yc 
ſelf, than to ſee another hold them in, 2 


troubled. Greyhounds going to the caſe, an 
good to all, and ſignifie actions and imploy 
ments enſuing. To ſuch as are accuſed, ani 
are in ſuits of Law, they are ill; But rctur 
ing from hunting, they take away fear, ati 

binder a workman. A houfſbold dog ſignifietl 
Firms, ſervants and poſſeſſions to come. An 
thor man*s do fawning en us, fignifies cra 
and deceit againſt us by his maſter. Biting anc 
barking at as, ſignifie injuries, adverfities and 
oftentimes aches. + Little ladies dogs fignitnn 


Sheep lignificth advancement, and ob 
taining of goods, wherefore it is gol 
to dream you have many of theth, or ſe 
themof others, and feed them 3 eſpecially wif t. 
thoſe which defire to handle Government and. 
charge of people; and thote which have are 
tained thereto already. It is alto good for Se N 
« | 


phiſtalſ} 


ou 


Hit Interpretation of Dreams. 67 
Wiſters, pedants, and School- maſters. The 
m ſignifieth the maſter, or the prince and 
ng. It is good to dream to be lifted on high 
rely, and by plain and eaſie places; eſpe- 
ally for orators, attorni-s, proctors, and all 
ole who deſire to heap up Gold. and filver 
their labour; goats ſignifie. no good, but 
e worſt to navigaiors, Aſſes bearing charge. 
Song and obedicnt, are good for friendſhip 
d company, and fignifie the wife, compani- 
or friend, being not proud above their 
anMate, or fierce, but gentle and very obedient: 
ey are alſo good in all affairs and enterpri- 
. Mules are good for all works, eſpecially 
Wiſbandry ; only they croſs weddings or pro- 
ation. If the aſſcs and mules are hot, or 
ad, and do any hurt, or be ſavage, it argu- 
nah deceit by ſome of our own houſe or ſub- 
as: Mules alſo ſignifie ſickneſs, as I have 
own by experience : Oxen in labour are good 
Wt all; but in a herd they are trouble, divul» 
tion, and peril. The bull ſignifieth any great 
rſonags, eſpecially if they threaten or pur- 
you: To mariners it is tempeſt, and if he 
ound yau, it is hurt and ſhipwreck by ſome 
onveniences, which ſhall fall from the to 
the maſt, as I have often experienced, ink 
daily often falls out. Thus much ſhall Tuf« 
e conceraing domeſtical and familiar b-aſts, 
Now let us ſpeak of wild and ſavage beats | 
. | 0 


- 


1 


es 4RTIMEDORUS. 


= To ſce a gentle, familiar and fawning Lio 


ſignifieth good and profit by the King to a ma 
of war; by the ſcnience of the Judges « 
the wrcſtler, or fences ; by the magiftrate t 
the mechanick, and by the maſier to the {e 
vant: For the Lion repreſents thoſe perſonf®®* 

for his force and might; but if he be hot, ar] 
would hurt, it ſignifieth f. or and ſickneſs, ant 
threatning by ſuch perſons, and danger of fire 
To ſee or have the forchead of a lion, is goof 
for all, and moſt often the begetting of a ma 
child: The lioneſs ſignifieth as the lion, on 
Teſs good and Teſs hurt, and not by m 
but by women. I have alſo known by thi 
dream of a lioneſs fearing or biting rich per 
fonages have fallen into crimes and accuſation 

Ihe leopard ſignifies (both the man and thi 
woman) wicked and deccitful, by reaſon of the 
diverſity of colours; alſo people of a ſtrang 
ccuntry, ſickneſs, exc-:eding ſear, and ſore · eye: 
The ſhe-hear figrifi.s a wife, ſickneſs and re 
turn from a ftrange country. The elephan 
ſeen in a dream, is fear and dang r. I have 
often obierved and known that the Elephant 
affrighting on-, ſignified ſickneſs; and catciþ 
ing, ani killing one, ſignified death. I knew 
in Itily a rich and wealthy woman, whic 
dr amt tat ſhe was mounted upon an elephan 
and ſhortly after died. You muſt underſtand 
that every wild beaſt generally repreſenteth our 

2 enemies 


* 


" | E. Interpretation of Dreams. 69 

[iooflnemics 3 and therefore it is always better 

mi overcome them, than to be overcome 
es them. The wolfe ſignifieth che year, and a 
e ruel enemy hunting plainly againſt us. The 
e fer * | 
rſonlaemy, hunting fecretly by ſurprizing and 
anying, and molt olten, deccit by a woman, 
an The ape ſignifieth a malefactor and deceiver. 


x ſigoifieth the ſame that the wolfe, and an 


6x The wild boar, ſignifieth rain and tempeſt to 


doo oſe which travel; and to ſuch as plead, a 
maſong adverſary; To ploughmen, fierility ; . 
on!$nd to him which marri. th, a rude and angry 
n offife: To ſhips it ſignifieth the governance 


thifod- courſe; and in land journeys, the way 


Sie or hard to hit. In other places it figni- 
ionic, that there are fugitives and deceivers, 
the and perjured perſons, fearful and unaſ- 
tured. One may be judge of every other beaſt 
nge ccording to the former manner, and by thoſe 


nember, that domeſtical beaſts, which ſhew 
bemfelves fierce and ſavage, ſignifie ill; and 
ontrariwiſe, cruel and ſavage beaſts, which 
Sn your dream repreſent themſelyes gentle 
ind domeſtical, ſignified good. Beſides, they 
vn fie excceding profit if they * Pet 
bur language, eſpecially if they ſay , apy*goo! 

ne Ning. . joy ful; and all which tte Peak, 
„ mmonly falkth out. | 


ou | Of. 


+ 


o whom they appertain. And you muſt re- 


8 7 ARTIMEDORYS. 


- be corcupted by the enemy of him that drea 


Th 
old 
© 


Of orceping beaſts. 
"THE dragon ſignifies a K ng or a Lord, 

the hw for his length ; alſo Rich 8 
gold and filver. When one dreams that =o 
comes and gives an attempt, or ſpeaks, it Mau 
nifies great gocds. If the contrary, it ſigſ HO 
fieth evil: A dragon folded, and wreathe..;, 
and tertifying, "Fenifieth great danger 0 
captivity, 4 f death to the ſick, The ſerpeſhut 
Hgnifics ſickneſs and enmity: and if any of 
ſeem to be governed by him, ſickneſs and aþ, 
mity ſhall 15 rely hardle him. The aſp aned 
and adder ſignify money and rich wives. 


0401 


| have known by experience, that theſe ty 


b. afts coming Re fa us, wreathed and wou ih 
together, have been arguments of good, cſp 
cially if they bite us. Any beaſt which off 
dreams that his wife carrieth hid in her boſo 
with plcaſure and paſtime, ſignifieth ſhe ſha 


it: but if ſhe fearful and ſad by reaſon ft 
aforeſaid beaft fo carried, ſhe mall be ſiek, a 
if ſhe be with child, her fruit hall be end; 


s 
07 Hing. 
Eis and all other inſtruments of flax ii 

catch. fiſhes, ſignifie the ſame which t 

hf and gins in the chaſe, of which we ha 
ſpoken before. So a line of ſitk or horfe-h 
and ts lignificth enk and 2 
whe 


therefore it is always better t dream you 


joſe which exerciſe an art or trade, which 
Squires ſitting by it, as maſters, te chers, and 
oal-malſters, for the firſt cannot fiſh and do 


olars and auditors, becauſe the fiſhes are 
Peſpute. To ca: ch little Fiſhes, is heavineſs, and 
rofit. Every fiſh of divers colours, is poiſon 
the ſick, deceit and tr-aſon to the whole. 


ments: 10 the ſick, gioſs fevers and inflam- 
Haiions ; revealing thoſe that would be ſecret. 
iſh which have fcal:s, and which one may 


Wd to every afflicted per ſon ; for it ſignifieth 
them abolition and loſs of-evils, wherewith 
Ney ſhall be encompaſſed. ; 


Of Frogs. 


them in a dream, is good for thoſe which 
e upon the commons. I knew a man who 
amed that he beat with his Aſt, and the 
zuckles or join's of his fingers upon frogs and 
ſo fell out, that his Maſter gave him autho- 

over all the affairs of his houſe. So then 
> muſt think that the pond; repre ſents the 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 71 


old them yourſelf, than that any other hold 
m. To catch much fiſh together, and very 
g. ſigniſie to all, gain and prefit ; excepft 


Weir Trades, the others ſhall have fooliſn 


ted fiſh ſiguꝭ fies to ſervants and malefactors, 


Will, are good for the ſick, captives and poor, 


ROGS are abuſers and praters : but to ſee 


- 
o 
: >» 4 2+ MA 
ws ew —— , oo , anti a 


Houfe 


— 


72 4K 1 K 095 


Houle, the frogs the inhabitants, that the ſtrik}* 
ing of his fingers the commandment. 


Of great Manſters and Fiſhes of the Sea, 
O fee a great fiſh in the ſca, is good ft 
no man, only the Dolphin excepted z whiz 
promiſeth wind from the place from whena 
he cometh; but out of the ſea every fiſh ; 

great monſter, is good, for they can hurt « 
more, nor fave themfſclves: And therefore 
beſides that, our dream ſignifi:s that our ene 
mies cannot hurt us: It faith moreover, th 
the wicked ſhall be puniſhed. Notwithſtanc 
ing, the dolphin being ſeen out of the ſea, it 
not good, but ſignifi-th the death of ſome of 
our good iriends. | 


J 


7 


of dive. dappe is and cormorants. 
ſee in a dream, dive dapper, and cor 
3 morants, and: other ſuch like birds of th 
"fea, is peril to mariners, but not death. TS 

|  , Others they ſignific their Friends, and whore 
geceivers, wicked and perjured Pyrates, whic 
Munt rivers and the ſea, And if in dreaming 
He ſees theſe birds, and loſe any thing, he ſh 

never recover it again, Ducks alſo, and drake 
| 9 birds of the river, ſignifie the like. 


Of dead files. 
Te, ſee or find Fiſhes dead in the bes N 
not ä for it betokeneth vain hopes 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 73 
but it is better to catch them, or buy them a7 
y way. Allayt is good to eat them dreſt. 
ind, according to their dreſſing you muſt 
doe as followeth. To fee a fiſh in his Cham 
fa her, it is ill to a maſter, and to the ſick, A Wo- 
nan with child, dreaming that ſhe hath a fiſh 
Soſtcad of a child, according to the Ancients, 
he ſhall have a dumb child: but as I have 
wn, it ſignifieth more often that ſhe ſhall 
ve a dying child, or of lictle life. 
| Of Birdiug or Hunting of Birds 
HE. lime twigs and glew is the return of 
thoſe which are aſar off, the recove- 
ig of fugitives, or any loſt thing. Ot the 
ets and hays to catch birds in, we muft judge 
of thoſe of wild beaſts. | 


a 


Of all ſorts of Bird. 
Reat birds are better for the rich than 
the poor, little and tidy, are the con- 
7. To ſee an cagle flying over a ſtone, 


aich thoſe which are in fear, it is evil. Alſo ie 

aifieth return of him which is in à far 
untry. And if his flight be far, and at 
and pleaſure, it is good, ard fignfiicth, 
t the buſineis ſhall kave an end, but not fo 
n. An cage flying, and falli: g upon the 
d of him which dreameth, it ſigufies his 
ath ; To be mounted upon an eagle, fig- 

ä nificth 


ole which would undertake buſinets ; ' burt 


= 


* 


HH ARTIMBDORUS. | 


good, for they ſhall be welcome, and received 


great profit. O'tcntimes it fignifieth. chang- 


ing, hath been found a geod Dream by Ex- 


4 ad threatener : to others it is hindrance of 
= affiirs. The Bird called a Grip, is good forſhhe; 
* earthen Potters, Tanner, and Dyers of Lea. 


de Kite Ggnifieth theives and Robbers 3 theſhy 
| Grow may ſigaifie 
F rhixcf.:) The Raven ſignifieth hndrance oi 


nE&h'to Kings, Princes, and mighty and 
rich Pefſonages, death: But to the poor it is 


tall rich men, from whom they ſhall draw 


jag 6n:s Country,” and going into another: 
Nation. The Eagle *threatning, ſignifieth 
threataing of ſome great Pet ſonage. Bit 
being gentle, or givirg any thing, or ſpeak- 


p=rienc-, The woman which dreams that 
ſhe hath received an Eagle, ſhall bear a child 
which ſhail riſe (according to his Quality). 
to goods and honour, ' To ſee a dead Eagle 
is good for a Servant, and him which is in 
fear; for it ſign fieth the death of the Maſter 


ther; but to Phyſicians and Patien's they are 
evil. Alſo, they ſignifie wicked Striplingys, 
and Robbers dwelling without the Town 
and evil in every Thing. The Faulcon and 


the adultreſs and the 


affairs, an old wife and. Winter. Bats ligh b 
nie nerdy Fo ks, and trouble in vainghn 


- which the J y allo ſignifieth, - Wild pidge kat. 
ons ſign. ie wild and diſſolute Women; and 
7 ul. | A. —— 


| th 
camF)-. 


* 


LY 


—_—_— 


* B bp e +2 Dries. 75 | 


Jaume pidgeons ſigniſie honeſt women and 
TE matrons : eſpecially pleaſure in - buſineſg; 
Hand in. caſe of friendſhip, company, and re- 
Concilinion, they are good, becauſe they 
I flock together. Cranes and ſtorks ſeen in a 
ock, + figoifie that Theives and Enemies 
bY ſhould be Hed from t In winter, bad weather, 
and tempeſts; ard in ſummer drought: But 
being ſeen alone, and a part, they are good 


him which is afar off: they be alſo good in 
dſcaſe of weddings and procreations, eſpeci⸗ 
y) Bally che ftork : by reaſon of the aid and 
leFrouriſhment which her little ones give her. 

The ſwan ſignifies a Man muſician, and his 
terflmuſic ; revealeth ſecrets, by reaſon of his 
ol lcolour. Being ſeen of the ſick, it ſignifierh -* 
forſpealth : but it he ſing, death. z for he I 
Ka · ings, but near death. L 

143 10 Flies. . => 

2 Ees are good to — and to wel 
a thereby get. profit, to others they -in 
onifie trouble, by reaſon of the noiſe they © 
ake ; and wounds, by reaſon of their ſting 3 
Sod lickneſs, by teaſon of their honey and 
Max, Fluttering- upon ones head, they are 
ligFhood to him that Would be a thief er cap! 
in an: to others, they fignibe evil, eſpecially 


theſe flies, and alſo1to- — is good 
J 


or a Traveller, and fignifie the retura f. 


E before People or Soldiers/ T's ſhut J 


6 to 


|. 56 4RTIMEDORUS. 
|. to all, only except to Countrymes and 
Plowmen. 3 


NO dream to fil well, is good for all; but 
to be ina tempeſt upon the River or 8 2, 
is ill, ſignifieth heavineis and danger. To 
fſiuffer ſhipwreck, the Ship being overwhelm- 
ed or broken, is moſt da g:rcus to all, except 
thoſe which are d:taincd by force; for top. 
them it ſigniñe th relcaſing and liberty. It ish 
always beſt to fail in a great ſhip, whichſlife 
bath charge: Alio it is better to fail by SeaJVir 
than by Lud. To have a mind to ſail, andfhor 
and not to be ahle, is hindrance of affairs. Tok 
e from the Land, Ships on the Sea ſailing ah 
their eaſc, is good to all, and ſignifieth to tra-. 
= vel; or return from travel, or Meſſengers and 
vers from Sca, Ships going from a Haven tc 

|. Sea, ſignifie good and flow affairs; but arri 
= ving to the Haven, the contrary. For the art 
© * ficial Haven ſigniſics always our Friends andibr 
B. nt factors ; the Rocks, thoſe whom we lov 
dy coaſtraiat ; the anchors, ſurety, but hingh: 
drance of voyages; the Ropes which keep 
the Ship at Land are debts and impediments ] 
the Maſt fignific th the Maſter of the Houſe, of F 

' Galley. To ſce any part of the Ship on fir. 
and burn, ſignifieth danger, leſt ſhe break one 

3 ſe 


chat ſide, or danger to him which by 
fide of the Ship is meant. 


1 — ＋ 22 ” 


Of 8 
Tre Plow i is good for marriages, procreati- 


on, and affiirs, but it requircth time. 
ut The Yoke is good 
a, fore it is better for them to tee it broken. 
To The Sythe is hurt, for it cuts all, and fign fieth 
m+ the time of halt a year. The Saw fignifies 
-ptiſthe wom in and her prof; : The Cutter of he 
tofplow, the Wood, the Fan, and the Sythe, is 
 i$filkhurt, departure and loſs. The Cart is the 
ich hie of him that dreams it. To dream to cut 
deaflVines, or recap out of time, fignificth that 
14 your buſineſs ſhall be ſlacked until ſuch time 


Corn, or like grain, are alſo hindrance z 
r this is not ready meat. Holes in the 
arth, ridges, or ſccret places of the earth, 


de Wite, the Life, and the goods of him 
hich dreams it. Hedges, Pales, Ditches ſet 


to ſuch as are in fear they hinder 
avelling z but in other aff urs lignifie ad, 
ids, and ſupport in neceſfity. 


Of Trees. 
THe Oaks are 


people, and alſo foes ;- the 

fk Olive- tree is 2 Wie, the Combat, 
incipality, and Liberty z therefore it is good 
ſee it flouriſhing well, bearing fair and 
We fruit in Seafon. To beat down Oli | 
# . 3 3 | 's {4 


„yet not to ſervants, Where- | 


men uſe to cut Vines, and mow. Sheaves 3 


here grains are ſowed, or hidden, ſigniſie 


r limits and confines of inheritarces, are 


Pomgranate Trees, Apple Trees, and Peaſpel 


: elms, aſhes, and other ſuch like, are god 


2 - ART 1 NU K. 5˙0˙ 9 8. 


is good for all but ſervants: to gather olive 
on the ground, or tread: upon them, is pai 
and anger. © The bay- tree is a rich and far 
wife; it is alſo ill ſucceſs of affairs, becauſe od 
. bitter; but for phyſicians;- pots anal 
divines it is good for their art: The cb: 
pPreſs- tree is patience and — Pine tre; c 
ami bodies of fir- trees have reference to Pn 
* and mariners, becauſe that theredor 

Men make ſhips, and alſo. rozen to ' otherha 
at. Ggnifieth floth and frar. Orange-treelic 


Trees, muſt be accounted of, as their Fruit c 
of which we-ſpake in our firſt book, in . 
ſpeech of — Pine · trees, black Popla 
| » 
only for ſoldiers, joyners and. carpenters 
- to others, they are poverty, becauſe that the 
are Trees without fruit. Beech and Mir tief 
trecs are wanton women, and are good for tho 
which would undertake any ſuch buſineſs, and 
for the ſick : To others they are ro ant 
labour. K | 
| - Of ee Ur bi | 
1Ow-dung, horſe-dung, and all other 
4* (except Man's) i is good only to a Plow 
man; to others it is heavineſs and hurt. I 
hath been proved by Expetience, that it iv 
t to ſuch as are of mean eſtate. To ſeq 

of man's dung is great evil, —_ 
[4 : _— 18 


oY 


Mit Interpretation of Dams. oh 
lively to be / fouled therewith, is moſt evil. To 
pay bis dung in his chamber, is great ſickneſs 
fir divorce of his wife, or friend, or change of 
iſe odging. It is very great danger to dream to 
an aſe ones belly in the church, in the market, 
r hot-houle, as ſhame, hurt or revealing 1 
erets. But to eaſe ones belly well, with eaſe, 
nd much, in a privy or chamber pot, is g 
dr all; it is a ſiga of allegiance, and? da- 
herharge of care and buſineſs. I have knowa it 
reeeylſo. good to eaſc ones Telf by the ſhore, in the 
eaiclds,” paths, rivers and ponds ; and the like 
ruiſſo dream of a cupboard, - - | * 
t * A x . | | 184 
jan O floods, ponds, fountains and wells. mv; 
a | Ivers having their watets clear and: cleans 
ers gliding gently, - are good for Servants» -- 
hend thoſe which have law: ſuits, and ſuch as 
rtl vou travel; for they ſignifie the. Maſters, 
hood judges, which do as they will; and ab, 
aniſſo travellers, becauſe they run daily. Hut if 
aui he River be dirty and violent, it is contrary 
de threatening of Maſters and judges, and 
hindrance of Journeys. It is yet worſe, if the 
ver ſeems to carry the Houſes and Inheri- 
ow4Jance of him which dreameth it, or himſelf 
ether; and abundance of evil, if it carry him 
ven to the Sea. It is alſo il} to be upon che 
ſeeſRiver, whole Waves run againſt the Prefſon, 
cond he cannot get out; for with pain ſhall} 
111 D 4 ohe 


— 


— 


| 


%% 4RTIMEDORUS. 
one ſuffer and ſupport the evils that he hath 
hath he never ſo great a ccurage. Great flood 
are rigorous Judges, angry Maſters, preſſes me 
people, Aſſemblies, and noiſe, by reaſon plc 

the violence and murmuring thereof: It ill 
good to paſs them on foot or ſwiming. Toll pt 
iu im in a River cr Pond, is to fall into grell 
inconvenier ce: It is cv.r beiter. to ſwinlkpre 
. withour ſtay io the ſhc re, than to be aſleep ii 
- ſfwiming, A clear River running into thilo 
Houſc, is the coming of ſome rich man, by 
whom one ſhall reap great profit : but a troubledjgV 
and violent River, and removing of move 
Abbes in the Houſe, is the violence of ſome e vin 
en. A River running out of a rich man nd 
Jouſe, bgnifieth that he ſhall have authorighlw 
. Wh the Town, and be very bountiful and ! 
beral: tothe poor man it is doubt of his Wife a 
or others of the Houſe, which he ſhall harder l 
rule. To ſte other than River- water enter intq of. 
the Houſe troubled ard dirty, is doubt df 7 
fire; but be ing fair and clear it is gain, pol 
ſeſſions, and moncy. In like fort is it to fee inflteyy 
his ground, a Houſe, a Well, which was noch 
| thiere before: alſo it ſignifi-th Wife or Chil 
&ren to thoſe which have none, To ſee a we 
full of Water in the Houſe is good, if it be 
cpen above, and ſtrangets draw out of it h 
for that is the loſs ot Wife, Children, -a 
Goods. The Pond being great, — the 
| f . ame ' 


- * 
4 
2 7 
xx 
4 3 
| 92 


. the River doth ;; but that ic ſigni” 
jth hindrance of travel, but being little of 
nean, is a rich and pleaſant Wife, lovin 
pleaſures. It is very I co fail in a Pond 
u River, but not wim. Fountains and 
IofSprings, abounding with good water, are 
Pod ro all, eſpecially to the ſick and Poor; 
uro uring to them healch and riehes: but dry 
hs clean contrary. 

/ Fens, Mountains, Marſhes} Paths, and Woeds, 
b Arſhes and Fens are good only to Shep- 
lee hcards, to others they are imprachments. 
ve Mountains, Vall-ys, Woods and Plains, are hea- 


nnd MalefaQors,. and hurt to the rich: It is 
fighhlways better to croſs over them, ard not 
h 
A | 
health, and fo on the 2 

x q Law, « and places of Pleading, and of Phyſicians.” 
: of 2 ces of Pleading, Judges, Attorneys and 
of Proctors, are troub e, anger, expence, and 
e infflevealing of ſecrets. If the ſick man dream 


Im he obtains his ſair, he ſhall come to better 
And ik 
c which is in ſuit, dreams that he fits in the ' 


hilSſtite : if otherw.ſ-, he ſhall die. 


ages Seat, he ſhall. not be overthrown, but 

tiber his advcriary:; Phyſicians ſeen in a dream, 

off» him which is at Law, ſignifie the lame 
Þ Attorneys and Proctor. | 


Hir Interfoerttion of Deane. 


her 


ſtay there, than to lumber in the way. — 
age, Plain, and caſiz paths are fore runners 


[| 
i 
1 


inefs, fears, and troubl-s, ſtripes to ſervants © 


#2 4R'TIMED OR Us. 
| «IT 1 Of g eſtates, and dignities. 9. 44: 4 . 
Jo dream to be a king or emperor, to the 
fiel is death for as the King, ſo allo 
death is ſubject to none: To him which is iat! 
Health, it is loſs, or ſeparation of Parents and 
friends, for the king hath no companion: to 
2 milefatory it is ſurprizing, and diſcovering 
his faulis; for the King is known, and en- 
compaſſed with his guard: the Scepter, crown 
and habit, or ornament royal, fſignific aþþ 
much. ;Fhezpoor man, which dreams be is 2 
king, ſhall» do worthy © deeds z whereof he 
all have honour without profit. The ſervant 
mall be at liberty. It is very good for a Philo- 
10pher, poet or ſooth- 
moreifree and royal than a worthy: ſpirit. Te 
dream to be a captain, to thoſe that are accuſ-· er 
tomed thereto, i good; to the poor it is 
trouble and defamation 3 to the ſervant liberty. 
Too be a Ton- clerk, it is to do another man's 
work with pain, . voidiof profit. To the ſick it 
Js death. To the ſcrvant it is good government 
of the houſes faith! and authority. To be a 
Mayo or bayliff of the Town, or to have 
charge and government of children and wo- 


Þ miſſion and power over the living, is good for 

Pnyſicians, and - thoſe that are ſtudioas:of the 
+ government af life and health: To others it is 
P=rroublcs and defamation, To give alms and 
—_— general 


— 


fayer,.: for nothing. ised 


men, are troubles and anger. To have a Com- d 


| His Inter pretali on , Dreami. 83 
Þcneral diſtributions ; to the ſick, it is death: 
nd diſfipation of goods to the whole, trou- 
le and defamation. To good men being poot; 
t is good, betokening 4. and advancement 
ming to them; ſo without goods we can- 
ot give ſuch alms. Al ſo it is good to Players 
d Morrice-dancers,. for it ſignifieth to them 
onour and praiſe; when one maketh thet a- 
reſaid Alms and diſtribution, to dream that 

une taketh bis part, is good; but not to take 
a, or receive it, is good to none, bat evident 
befſy ſignifieth death; for the dead receive no 
int ore. Any dignity which requireth carrying 
gold and purple, is death to the fick, and dil. 
redit to others. To be made a Biſhop, i is good 
* only except thoſe which would | be 
To be chief of the houſe, aſſembly, ot, 

is 3 is Pain, anger, and oftentimes hurt. 
y. Noy ſtate belonging - to a man, which a 
1's au dreameth ſhe hath, ſignifieth her 1 | 
_ Und the contrary. ; | 2 g 


mar, of the army, aud eleftion of men at arms. 

Ar and affairs of war, are troubles and 
anger to all, exce pting Captains and 
Idiers, and ſuch as. live by it; for to uch 
s gain. Arms which cover the body =P: 
it ſurety, as the Buckler, Helmet, Cromer t, an 

h like: Others which one toſſeth and bran- 
| th, as the Pike, * Arrow, and Darts, 


ſigni- 


. _ 2 —_— 


4 Fl 
0 "+. 
o : 10 9 
1 rr. # —— ow + Aww ,, _ 


"te 4 R TIMER DO R Us. 


ſignifieth debate and (dition. The wood, knik 


or Word, is courage, force, and vertue. The 
buckler and helmet have alſo referrence to the 
wiſe, who ſhill be eicher fair and. rich, or poor 
and ill-favoured, according to the quality of 
the harveſt. To chuſe men of war, or ſoldie 
to the batt'e, is death to thoſe which are ſome 
way fick, and often to old folks : to others, it 
is bofineſs and anger, change of place, flight and 
ges. To the idle and poor, it is work and 
t which ſhall befall them s for the ſoldi 
1s not idle, nor without praiſe: To a ſervan; 
it is — and eſtimation. 


13 Of fingle-combat. 
Olsgle combat ſignifieth noiſe or Law ſuits 
which r<cf. mble the pains and labour of the 


-* ebmbatants ; The Arms of him which flyeth 


fignifieth to go to law; Sometimes I have 
known that As 


Of the Sun. 


Tages. 
| 1 dream the ſun riſeth ſhining and cler 
is good to all, and alſo ſetting ſo, it f 

nifieth gain, operation, prot-Qion, and lber 
to Servants; bu fro ſu ch as would be ſecr 

is il}; for os and diſcovers all, Like 
wile, if it riſe towards the Eaſt, it relievell 
the ſick, after he hath been on, 


dream TIO fore told mary © 


rr 1 2 


His Interpretutùm of Dreams. 85 
fgnifieth that ſore eyes ſhall not make blind 
the patient, and the return of him wh ich 
afar off, Alſo it is good for him which would 
travel towards the Eſt ; to others ia all af- 
off fairs it is croſs. If the Sun ſeem to riſe in the 
ien South or North, you muſt judge thus, the 
Sun being dark or bloody, or as it were mur- 
tF muring with anger or heat, is io all, and 
fgnifi-th ſereneſs of eyes, ſickneſo and childten 
yet hach it been found good 10 them which. 
are in doubt, and which would b-1.cr.t. 
The lun deſcending upon the Earth, or any 
houſc, is a ſign of danger by fire; ente ing the 
Chamber, and thrcati:ing is great ſickneſs and 
burning, but if i: ſpeaks or makes any good 
| fign, it is abundance of gocds The Sun 
hd Vaniſhing away, or hiding and abſ:n: mg it- 
ſelf, is il to a'l, except to thoſe that would be 
I i{-cret. Moſt often it is loſs of ſight, or death 
of a Child. It is always b. tier to ſee the Sug 
beams entering the houſe, than the Sun itſelf ; 
for the Beams are abundance of goods, the ſun. 
abundance of evils, which one cannot ſuf- 
earl fer, no more than he canendure the light or 
ſigh great heat of the Sun near him. The Sun 
per 


giving Or ſtealing away any thing, is loſs a 1 
cre} danger. n we 
. o, the Moon. -.-- 


etl { moon is the wife, nurſe, daughter or 7 


— | - 
# 


Aa 8 Bus IG ow — - 


. - 
OL nf . 


L 


6 ARTIMEDORYUS. 


and ſignifics money,. riches, merchemdize and 
raffick, alſo navigation, the eyes of him 
At Uread s, and the Maſter, or Miſtreſs, 


And therefore, if the Moon turn her ſelf into 
good and joy, it is good and honour to thoſe. 
hom it repreſ-nis: And on the contrary 
to fee himſelf in the Moon, is the ſon of the 
man, the daughter of the woman that dreams 


it. This dream alſo is good to exchang-rs, 


uſurers, and takers of receipt for victuals. Al- 


ſo it is good for thoſe which would ſhew 
themſelves and appear: But it diſcovercth 


the hidden, and puts ſick men and mariners, 


in danger of their lives. What good or evil 
the Sun ſigoifieth, the ſame fignification hath 


the Moon allo, but leſs and more to the wo- ſh 


: man than to the man. 
Of the Stars. 
Ce all he Stars clear and fair, is 
for a traveller, and for all buſineſs, and 


the Sun or moon. Thoſe Stars are planers which 
are cauſes of cold fignifie anger and danger: 

| Bur thoſe which cauſe fair fine calm weather, 

e proſperity and riches. Thoſe which are 
15 cauſe of the winters ſhorteſt day, are change 
into evil; of the ſummers” longelt day, into 
good or better. Such Stars as vaniſh and go 
© Out of the Sky, is poverty, and forfaking to 
the rich: For you muſt imagine that the Sky 


* 


2 for ſecrets, in which they agree not with bi 


ſigni-F 


i Interpretation f Dreams. 85 | 
anifieth the houſe of him that dreams; the 


Sars his goods and poſifſions z to the poor this 
eam ſignifieth death. It is only good for 


em which have attempted ſome. great 
evils. Whoſoever dreameth that the Stars 


zaniſheth out of the Sky, his hairs ſhall fall 
rom his head. Stars falling upon the earth, - 
r yapiſhing, is loſs of parents or friends, great 
r little, accor ing to the quality of the Stais, 
o rob the Stars, is hot good; for it bath fal- 
n out, that after this reMh, the dreamers 
ereof hade committed ſacriledge, and ſor 
have been apprehended, and puniſſed, To 

t the Stars alſo is not good, except to A- 
a Sooth-ſayers, to whom it ſig- 


Pifieth gain; to others, — To lee the flars 


nder the eaves of the houſe, is that the houſe 
hall be forſ:ken; conſumed or burnt, or that 
he maſter or the houſe ſhall die. The Comets, 

ams, and burning rayes, and other like 
lings, 3 4 in a dream, bgnifie as their nature. 


ri 07 tbe Rain-bew.. | * | 
He Rein- bow on the right hand, is good, 
on the left, ill; and we muſt judge the 
ght or the left, according to the Sun. And 
what quality ſocver it/appeareth, it is a 
od ſign to any one that is afflicted with po- 


rey, or any one affliction; 1*⁰ it 1 
le time and air. 


of 


> Smoaky, dark or obſeure is ill time or anger. 


4 Ppurpol. d to travel, and which were indebted. 


1 | 


h A TIME DON US. 


Of the clouds. 


HITE clouds is Prof perity: Mounting | 
from the earth on bigh, is a Voyage 

| the return of the abſent, à d revcaling of ie. = 
e-ers. , Red or irflamcd is ill iſſue of affairs 


Of the Wind. 
En:le Winds are good; violent are wick · 
ed and evil People:  Froubl. ſome tem- 
peſts of winds, ac pcrils and troubles, ccc 
Of . earthquakes, and gaping of the earth. up 
HE E-rth trembl ng, is a of eſtats 
and aff es: but oꝑ ning, deep pits, con- 
cuſtons, and tur ings upfide down of the earth 2 
are injorics, death, and loſs of 8. Oah 
this dream hath been tri-d good to thoſe which 


To 
of the ladder, the Bp, a caſe, a mili/tone, a 
Ut Peli, and the cock. 

THE ladder is a fign of travelling, the 
ſteps are advancement; ſome fay they 

PF are dagger. A caſe or frying- ag-pan is hrs, 1nd h 
2 Woman which is given to talk. The Mill- 
ſto1e ſignifies end of great and angry Matters, , 
and a good and loyal Servant. The peſtle is 
the Man, the mortar the Wom3n. The cock 
is the Father of the Family, or "ns * of 


the Lodging, 2 


2 SLE 


_— 


"He Interpretation 97 N 
Of Eggs. 


wh ch ſell and trade with them, are good; 
To others it is good to have little ſtore of them, 
od ſignifieth gain; but plenty of them, is 


n arc, Pain, noiſe or law ſuits. 


ng 
k 


— 


Of monſters, or - things againſt nature. 
OU muſt unde: ſtand, and hold in gene- 


K- 
M- 
Fcording to the courſe of Nature, are vain 
jopes o _—_ which ſhall not fall out. 


* 5 : . Of Books, 


tm | them. To dream to eat them, is good to 
ok chool-maſters, and all that make Prefit by 


Lo others | it is ſudden death, 
of bie and of ſhaver. 


heſDArtidges fignifie men and women: But 

k moſt * Women wi:hout conſcience, 
grateful, hard. Snares. are detainigg, im- 
aching, and ſickneſs: To ſervants, they are 
yalty, honour and authority, from which the 
thankful ſhall be depoſed. To thoſe which 
not married, they are weddings; 


51 ſhall have. 


F ik 


. 8g 
13 | Gs to Phyſicians, Painters, and thoſe, 


ral, 1h:t all Monſters and impoſſibilities z | | 


P OOKS are the life of him that dreams of 


d. Nooks, and which are ſtudiqus for eloquence 


to thoſe 
hich have no Children, they * tnat 


a of 
= 


| 
| 
= 
'T 
| 


V which-hath a wife, to die ſignifieth ſeparationſþ 


* 
1 
* 
- 


— 


+» of 


i ſhould be a doubt, that ſhe hath beeniifor 
bear them, To be ſcourged of the Gods, of tag 


Dot good... 


07 Stripes. Kki 
T ; is good to whip and ſcourge thoſe onh 0 
which are under us, except our wife; faire 


nought : Others bring profit to them which e 


dead, or of our ſubjects, is not good z but thailiri 
good of them. It is always good to be whip tt 
ped with rods, or with the hand, and ſiggifi 
profit; but ary leather, reeds, or nN 1 


of Death. 3 
FO drown to be dead, is Wedding to hig 
which is to marry y for death and mary 
rage: ee one another. For the ſick tal 
dream they are married, or they celebrate 
their Weddings, is fign of death. For him 


from her, or his companions, friends or parents vi 
for the dead keep not company with the living 
but the contrary, . To him which is at home, 
1 —— he ſhall go abroad. It is a good 
for Fathers, Pocts, Orators, and Pni lo-? 
Ts; the firſt ſhall have Children which 
"Om live, the other ſhall compoſe works 
© worthy of memory.” Moreover, I have made 
experience, that this is a good dream fort 
_ thoſe which: have heavineſs or fear; for the 
dead have no more fear or heavineſs: Alſo 
ta thoſe which a are in. N for inheritance, and 
V | 8 which , 


———_ 4 
* +, a * 
mg + SH - 
— A 


i FREE f Dpa 91 


hich would buy lands; for the Bei are 
puh ords of the Ea 5. In other Jaw-ſuits this 
 [offream is not ſo good. But it healcth the ſick, 
eor the dead are ſick no more. It is all one 
o dream that you are dead, or thit you are 
theſarried and buried for dead. To dream to be 
Pied quick is not good; for it often figni- 
ub th priſon and captivity. B. it good or evil 
What death ſignifieth, if one dream that he is 
Pied by another Man's hands, that good or 
vil ſhall come by his means. $77 one dreams 
te kills himfelſ, he ſhall have that good or evil 
iahhich death Ggnifiech, by himſelf. Death by 
ſentence of juffice makes burt Goods or Evils 
peater, To be hanged or ſtrangled by ano- 
Per, or by himſ:1f, is trouble and anguiſh : It - 
imſſs alſo change of place and Houſe. To be bur- 
jonflled quick ſignĩfieth as much as to be ſcorched 
s;vith lightening, wh-reof we: have ſpoken be- 
„ore: bur properly to the ſick it is 7 figs of 
hea'th, to young Folks, calamities, cnc 
Fence, and be ts of youth. To be crucified, 1s 
vod to thoſe which would go to Sea; and to the 
door; but to the rich, the contrary : To the 
wmarricd it is weddings; to ſervants liberty 3 C 
dis, alſo change of place; to be. crucified in 
the Town, is to have ſuch an Eſtate and office 
the pl. ce requires here one dream be ſis. 
o have combat with beaſts, is go d tothe 
Ic wy and ſignifieth Goods, whereby they man 
| nouriſm 


—— 


Io be carried by a woman, a child, or a pootff 


92 ARTIMEDOR Us. 


.- "nouriſh th mſclves, and entertain 2 Train 
- To the rich it, is, anger and injuries. To my 
ny this hath been a token of ſickneſs : It] 
liberty to ſervants if they dream they are Kill 
by the Beaſts; - 


Of carrying another, or being carried. 
Fes to carry another, is better than to þ 

carried, in as much as it is more honod * 
to give than to take: For he which carrieti 
repre ſents him which doth good, or a pleaſure; 
and he which is carried, him which receiveth 


55 
h 


anf 


ſon, is means of profit and ſupportment. 
is good for a ſcrvant to be carried by his maſ - 
ter, and for the mean man to be carried by the 


rich. 

t the , 4 
O ly to ce tlie dead, without any other? 
2 Accident or-ſpe:ch, is to be ia the ſame 
Eſtate and Affection wherein the aforeſaid 


PF; dead Perſons were towards us: For if they A 


'  ececing bad when the dead ſeem to carry 
| -away and take from us apparel, goods, monics 


were our BenefaQors, the dream ſignifies good 
21 joy to us, and ſoon the —ͤ— It is ex- 


or victuals ; for it is death to the dreamer, or 

ſome ot his parents or friends. If the dead give 

us victuals, money or appartl, it is a good 

dream; but to ſuch as they who give none, it ii 

| * Caſc. ee amen ich dreamed | 
| that 


e J. eee 71 R 5 My 


$s get. u Friends tcl ſick. 


in 
m: 
t i 
le O money and treaſure. 


1K kind of coyn is ill. Bot] have tried that 
money of braſs and bullion ſignifics © hca- 


Wor dels and angry words; but mony of ſilver, 


prds and talk of great affairs; of gold, 


re 
h greater. It is alſo better to dream to have 
* le ſilver than much; bccauſe chat one 


Fanot employ great heaps without pain and 


"She treaſure be little, the evil ſhall be little; 
great, the evil great, with anger, heavineſs, 


be bad, as well as for the * 
Of Weeping 


any Friend departed, or for any cauſe, 
is joy and mirth for ſome good act. And 


ligity and reſemblance with the exteriour 


tempeſts, and from tempeſts to fair Wea- 


heavineſs to joy, and again from joy to 
inen: therefore alſo to be merry, is a fign 


$] 


ITY wife bling d. ad, made al! the becs 1 4 
is houſ-; and th. n ** _ alter many of ; 


Ome ay, that to dream of money, and all 1 


are, To find Treaſyre hid in the Earth, if 


death : For they open the Earth for the 


NO weep and grieve, ay BPR it be for 


x without reaſon ;; for our Spirit hath ſome: 


ir which environeth it. As therefore Air is 
ways ſubject to change from fair Weather 


r 3 ſo it is likely that our ſpirit wy gael 


TR ARTIMEDORU. 


of heavineſs: but the party muſt have ſom 
cauſe of ſadneſs : for to be fad without a cauſ 
were a ſign 28 ſhould be ſad for a cauſe. 0 
| bel 

* Of Tomb. . 


| To have a Sepulchre of Tomb, or mf© 
* build one, is good for a ſervant, for pr 
fſhnall have liberty; and to him that hath ge 00 

ch Id, for he ſha!l have one that ſhall ſurſ® 
vive him: Alſo it is ofta fign of Marriage 
and getting of lands, It is a good dream i 
general b.th io rich and poor: but graves fal 
Ang. ar fell and ruinated, are the contrary. 


N 


R 07 the dead reviving and Sing again. 


N * 'T He d-ad reviving, are troubles and hurt 
for we muſt think as if the” thing wer 
indeed, what trouble there would be if th 
dead ſhould revive, which would re-enter inf 
to the fruit on of th-ir goods, and that woulc 
be anger and great loſs to thoſe which enjoy 
cd them after their death. The dead dying 
again, ſignifieth the death of thoſe whic 
bear their name, being their near kindreq; 
and. Affinity, ik they ſeem to die twice. | 
| tion or mortal bit fgnifieth the ſam 
Vith death. In like ſort, every beaſt tha 
dne ſhall find under the bed, "which. cy | 
| gale to die W „ * 
. $5 ola als ent 


\ 1 
— 5 to. | | X ty 


En Interprotaion' of Dreams 9. 
/ Weadings, © 0 
Eeing that Marriage and D-ath have 
J ſome Affinity, as che one ſig ifi ng the 
ber. I purpoſe in this place to ſpeak th re- 
. To marry a Ma d, to him which is fick, 
death: It is good for him which would en- 
prize any good buſineſs, for he ſhall have 
od iflue: And he which hopeth for any 
9. d, ſhall obtain it, for he which marricth, 
ts. ſome gocd- or dowry by his wife: To 
ers it is trouble or divulgition, | for 
fal thout this mem make no weddi gs. But | 
one takes an old woman, he ſhall not. 
rlue new, but old Afﬀeirs, not without, 
"Ffofit. If any one ſeeth his Wife married t | 
other, it is change of Affairs and actions, 
rer elſe ſeperation: if the women drea meh! 
thÞ* is married to another than her hoſes; "i 
ind, ſhe ſhall be 2 from him, n :3 
zuldde from dead, as ſome ſay. But I have 
und this not always true, but only when 
wife is not with child, or hath no chil- 
Wen, or hath no inheritance to ſell, or if; - 
jreche be with child, ſhe ſhall bear a ſor whom 
ſhall ſee married; and by. that means 


om 
uſ 


ume her ſelf, but her Son ſhall be married A 
tha anather : and ſhe which hath any goods 
ing tell, ſhall ſc Il it, and ſhall make a Contract 
Covenant, as one doth for maſriageeGe.. 


. +4 © * # wh bo 2 1 , 
* * 
* 
4 6 2 
- * 
. * - * . | 
x | _— 
; © 
- 
* 
U 


| . 
_—_ adi. at. ee. 2 n 


/ 


" 


6 ARTIMEDORUS. 


Of the ſwallow and nizhtingale. 
iE ſwallow ſignificth no evil, if ff 


1 make no attempt which denounce 


ſome evil, or-if ſhe appear in no other that 


works, and principally weddings and mi 
» fic, and promiſeth a  houſewifely wife, 

Houlſe-keeper ; for the Swallow liveth anc 
makcth ber neſt with us under the fam 
Roof. The nightingale ſignifieth as th 
ſwallow, only leſs good; for he is not (of 

miliar with uus. 

To Fly. 


IO dream to fly a little height from th 

Fo - earth, being upright, is good; for 
much as one is lifted higher than thoſe that ar 
about, him, fo much the greater and mo 
happy ſhall he be. It were better for hin 

not to be in his own country, for it ſignifie 
wandring, or not reſting, or returning to bi 
Country. To fly with wings, is good gene 
rally for all ; to ſervants it is liberty, to th 
poor riches; to the rich, office and dignity. Tt 

fly very high from the Earth, and witheu 
wings, is fear and danger; As alſo to fly ove 
the - houſes, and through tle ſtrects, and 
forlorn ways, it is trouble and dition. Tc 
fly into heaven, is for ſcrvants to ent t int 
3 8 Houſes, and eſpecially the _—_ tc 
=> * thok 


\ 


her natural colour. But ſhe ſignifies T00W:. : 


His Interpretation of Dreams, 97 


hoſe which would be ſecret, it is ill; for all 
the world ſees the heavens. To fly with 
the birds, is to keep company with ſtrangers, 
md pain and pnniſhment to malefactots. It 
$ always good, after having down on high, 
nay deſcend low, and after that to awake, but 
It is beſt of all ro fly when one will, and come 
down when one will; for it is a ſign of faci- 
lity, and good diſpoſition in affairs. But to 
fly by conſtraint, or being purſued by men, 
ſpirits, or beaſts, is not good; for they are 
great angers and dangcrs. To fly backwards; is 
Noot ill to thoſe that would fail ; for common- 
ly in a ſhip which gocth her courſę without 
tempeſt, the peopl- take their eaſe, and lie 
backward ; to others it is want of work and 
buſineſs ; for tholg which be ſo, are idle; to the 
ick, it is death. It is very ill to deſire to fly and 
cannot; or to fly with the head lowermuſt, 
and the feet upward.; and in what kind foever 
the ſick fly, it is death; for we defend, that 
he ſouls departing from the body, fly into 
heaven with grcat flight, as little birds do. 
To fly is ill to thoſe which have a trade or 
handicraft, which requireth no removing 
dut ot his p'ace ; it is good for captives. Many 
dy this dream of flying, have become blind, be- 
cauſe they fear to fall, To fly in a chair or 
bed, or being ſet in any under prop for the 
better ſuſtaining — is great ſickneſs 

| but 


98 ARTIMEDORUS. WF. 


but it is not fo ill to him that ſhould travel hoſe 
for it is a Ggn that he ſhould travel with Phi- 
Family, with his Tools and Moveables, in bv 
Cart or Coach, | 100 
Of juch as are worthy to be believed. ny 
T Hoſe which ina dream tell us any thing ne 
and are worthy to be b-licved, are in the 
firſt plice ſent from God; for to lie is a thingſſhin 
that agrees not with God. Next ſacrificers, for 
theſe are pleaſing to God, Then Kings and 
Prince, for every thing which ruleth hat 
Power and might of God, After tie m fathers, 
| Mothers; and Maſters; for they are as Gods, 
giving -us firſt our life, and after our form of 
od life. The next Prophets, and amongſtſpitt 
WV Sen-ſuch as are not given to lying nor deceiJſjeah 
- ving; as Soothſayers, Aſtrologers, and Interpre. It a 
ters of dreams. Then the dead, for thoſeſj 
Which lie, do it either for fear, or for hopeſſſ 
*- of good; but the dead neither fear us, nor 
expect any good at our hands. After childre 
old folks and beaſt are worthy of belief in 
wWrhatſoever they declare unto us in our dreams, 
No others are to be believed, except thoſe bir 
Which live well and ſolitarily. 
; The concluſion of the Author upon the . 
| .Second Book, 
F peradventure any of thoſe which ſhall 


Fife had. my books in their hands, — 
| | poſe 


- 
: 


", His Interpretation of Dreams. 99 


el;Soſe that I have put any thing in either book, 
hihhich, I have not known by experience, he 
n aSbvſcth himſelf : but having ſeen and under- 
tood the Preface of this book, he ſhall know 
yy purpoſe and intent. Moreover if any 
ng ne ha:h an opinion contrary to any ſpeech 
they me recited, b:cauſe it ſhall have (as I 
ingffthink) ſome probability z; he muft know for 
forflnſwer, that 1 know already that he will 
andfind whereof to ſpcak, and that which ſhall 
athſſe very likely; which I my ſelf can do a ſo: 
ers ut I ſeek not to complain, as thoſe” which 
ds, ek applauſe and favour at theatres, or which- 
| offfet their words to ſale. But always I cal tog 


gſtimneſs for me, Experience and the rule . qi 


alon : wherefore 1 have ſet down nothws 
tall, but what I have gained (with mus 


cel 
We 
of; 
pe 
nor 
rend interpretation of dreams. But I muft 
 inequeſt one little favour of the reader, that 
ns. e would neither add nor diminiſh any 
oſe hing of my prefent work. If any one thinks 
hat he can add, he may as weil make ano- 
der book : If he thinks any thing ſuperfluous, 
t him uſe only that which he ſhall and 
alllod, leaving the reſt for others. 


The End of the Second Boot. 


vel and induſtty) by experience. For 1 4 
we done no other thing day and night, but 
dictate and ſpent my ſpirit, in the juugment 


' ART1MEDORUS 


/ 


Nis Expoſition of - 7+ 


| | WY , | 
D R E AM g 
= | : The Third "car I N 
ere Rs * Pla 
Of play at Dice and Tables. C 


© Pream to play at Dice or Tables ra, 
1 is noiſe and debate for money. It ithic 
always good to win: To the ſick i 


is ill, if one gives over in play. The Dice off 
Tables ſimply ſeen in a- Dream, is ſediton anc 
bir 
litt. 


2 


= -noiſe': but loſs of them, is end of noiſe an 
ſedition, To fee a child play at dice or ta 
bpbles, and courtiers, is not ill: To a perte 

mam, it is ill to play at Dice, except he hop. - 
' for ſome ſucceſſion by the death of another ba 


for the dice are made of the bones of t 


Dead. 6 
O Theft, Sacriledge and Lying. 
dream that one ſteals, is not good, ex 
A cept to him which would deceive anc 
ther. By how much richer, and ſafely guardiſ0;| 
ed the thing is which one dreams he ſteals, us 
much greater is the danger to the Dreamerſer; 
for it is likely the dream ſubjects the Dreameſſiac 


Ihe 
ph! 


Cy 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 301 

the ſame pain that the Law doth Thieves, 

o commit Sacril-dge in a Dream, is moſt ill 
8 0 all, except to the ſacrificers and prophets; 

or by cuſtom they reccive and divide the 
it fruits of Oblations, and are always nou- 
ſhed by their Gods, and take not all openly, 
o tell a Nie in a d. cam, is not good, cxcept in 
Payers and Jeſters which practice it. It is leſs 
i] to lie to ſtrangers, than to h s own Coun- 
rymen ; for it ſignifieth great Mi:torcunes : 
ra, though one dream to lie to his fricads in 
| ungs of vcry imall importance. 


Of 2Quails and Cocks. 

N from ſea: they croſs Affiaities, friend- 
hips and. marriages, for they ſignify Noiſe, ſe- 
littons, and death to the ſick, if they croſs the 
ka, They are alſo croſs to voyages; for they 
Monify ambuſhes and treafons, becauſe they 
re ſpied when they fly, and often fall. into. 
he hands of Fowlers, and Hunters. Cocks 
which fight, are alſo noiſe and trouble. 

| Of. Ants. WES 


it argues Hurt, or a dang-rous Voyage. 
Other ants, which are diligent and induſtri- 


fertility : for where no grain is there you can 
F _ no Ants. They are allo good for ſuch 


E 3 AS... 


Uails are Meſſengers. bringing ill News | 


O ſee, Ants with Wings, is not good; * "i 


us, are good for Plowmen ; ; for they Ggnify. - 


| Qefire . 


- Which wil! aſſault and diſcredit the dream: 
to taverns it ſignifics that their wine ſhall 


108 AR TIMEDORUS. 

as live upon the common good, and ray 
profit by many; and to the ſick when the 
come near the body; for they are called in 
duſtr.ous , and ccaie not to labour, Wh. ch i 
proper to ſuch as live: But when they rang! 
about the body of the patients, it is deat 


b:cauſe they are the daughters of the earth 
and cold and black. 


Of Lice and Long Worms. 
O dream to have ſome. little quar.tity o T 
lice, ard find them upon his bedy off * 


gown, and kill them, ſignifies that one ſhal pli 


be dclivered from care and heavineſs. Bu 
to have a great quantity, is long ſickneſs, capti ( 


vit orgreat poverty, for in ſuch cafes lice 
| : abound, "And if one caſt them all away, i; 


argues hope to be delivered of all evils. Tec 
vomit worms by his mouth, or upon his ſeat 


1s to know his enemies and familiar Wrongers 


and to overcome them. \ 
Of Flies, Hornets, and little Worms which af, 
engendred in the Fi:fþ. i 


B worms are care and anger, and often- 
times diſpleaſure, which one ſhall have 
by his wife and Familiars. Hornets are p-op'e 


ſpoiland ſower ; for ſuch great flies love and 


Of 


ö. Elis Interpretation of Dreams. 103 


A Of Beating and Hatred. 8 

F'otes with his friends or ſtrangers, is- 
not good: the lick ſhall be in danger of 

nving and lofs of ſenſe. To fight with great 

Iperſonages, as Kings, Princes and Majeſtrates, 

s very bad. To dream to hate, or to be ha- 

ted, whither of fiiends or ene mys, is ill: for 

one may have need of all the world. | 

» Of Slaughter. p 

T © ſee people ſacrificed or killed, is good; 

for it is a ſign that our buſineſs is accom- 


rang 


- 


Mpliſhed, or near the end. 
the Crocodile and the Cat. 
Rocodiles ſignifie Pyrates, or robbers by 
ſea, or murderers and wicked perſons, 
In any ſort like the Crocodiles, The cat ſig- 
vifieth the adulterer or harlot t. 
| Of Crutches. | 
T Alking upon crutches, to malefaQtors- 
, it is priſon, Chains, and Stocks; to- 
others ſickne ls, or a vagabond- like life. 
To wall uron the Sea. 
Or to wa k upon the fea, to him which 
would travel, as aiſo to a ſervant, and-: 
bim which would take a wife is good, the one 
ſhall enjoy his wife, and the other ſhall have his 
a maſter at hs own pleaſure. It is alſo good for 
him which hith a law ſuit, for the ſea repre 
0; V E 4 ſenteth 


fäuſion of the waves. 


14 ARTIMEDORUS. 
preſenteth the judge, which handles fo 


well and others ill: and the Woman by rea- hol 
fon of the Moiſtneſs, and the Lord by ReaſonfÞ0% 
love of a-delightfal Woman. To a woman it is 

diſſolute life of her body; for the ſea is like t. 
ſhew, but jn the end ſhe brings many to evil. F 
This dream is good to all thoſe which Joveſſgov 
govern any public matter; for they ſhall haveſAn 
great honour and profit: For the ſea is likeſigec 


of the might. To a young man this Dream ier 
an harlot, becauſe it hath a fair appearance and 

and make profit opon the people, and whichſand 

2 multitude, by reaſon of the diſorder and con- Ithe 


, < 
. Of Sickneſs. by | 

2 T O be ſick, is good only to thoſe which 

are in Captivity or great Poverty; for 

fſickneſs makes active and lean, and diminiſh- 
eth the body. To others it is great idleneſs 
and want of work: It is the ſame caſe t 
dream that you viſit a ſick man, which you 
know ſignifieth that the event ſhall happen 
to him, not to the Dreamer: For we holdÞ* 
that our friends, Neighbours and Familiars, 
are the fantaſies and images that repreſ-nt 
things that are to befall us. Eſpecially, I have 
obſerved, that all th: good and evil things 
which the ſoul would ſignify to us betimes, 
and of greater importance, ſhe brings and re- 
8 7 * preſenteth 


— 


7 


His Interpretation" of Dreams.” rd 
neſenteth them in our dyn perſon : But 
things which ſhe denounced more“ 


} 
ea. wr 


ſorowly and of leſs appearance, ſhe repreſents' = 


n idem by ſome other. 


ry To make ſtatues and images of Mn n. 


e tt 

ndl POR io make images of Men, whether of 
vil. Earth, or any other Matter, is good for 
ovelgovernats of children ; for they ſhall govern 


ichind inſtruct them with honour and profit, : 


zvelAnd to - thoſe who have no children, it is 
Ike good alſo z for they ſhall have ſome very like 


on-Ichemſelves. 


To be faſtened in a Cart, and carried in it. 
ch PoR to be tied in a Cart to draw as an 
for Horſe or Ox, is ſickneſs, ſervitude, and 
h- pain, to every body, how rich or mighty ſo- 
eſzherer he be. To be carried in his Cart or 
Coach, or drawn by men, is to have Might 
dullnd Authority over many, and to have Chil- 
enfidren of good behaviour. As for Travellers it 
14s to have ſurety with ſlownels, 


go be Appardlledill PU yy 4 
ve Tf one be ill favouredly attired, it is ill to al! 
os and ſignifies abundance of mocking and 

8. outing, with ill -iflue of Affairs: This 15 : 
4s | 
199 _ 


s only good for flouters and ore. 


N ARTIMEDORUS. 


TJ᷑0o write with the left band 
ys with the left hand, is to make 


ſome ſecret circamvention, to cunnyſ 


catch, deceive, or defame any one.. 


Of a Father-in-law, and Mether-in-law, 
O dream to fee a father-in-law, or mo- 
ther-in-law, dead or alive, is ill, eſpeci- 
oY uſing violence or threatning 3 uſing 
gentle ſpeech and good entertainment, are vain 
1 and deceits. Sometimes they ſignifie 


er 3 the houſe; the father and mo- 
5 * ſtrangers 


0 our Predeceſſors. 


ele, fignifi: care, which ſhall turn to 
* or eyil, according to the order and 
S Once of our dream. Our, ſucceflors, 
be ing but children, is 5 and Pain; be- 
* ing greater, ſignifie ſupport. - WWE. 

4£ „ Rat and Wa, 

e rat ignifieth the ſervant; it is good 
l to fe many, playing and ſporting. But 
the weaſel ſignificth a bad and wicked wife, 
or law, or death, or gain; according to 
her doings, goings or comings. 


Of Dirt. 


F you dream of Dirt, it Ggnifierh koh 
or difhonour, 


: 


ages! for the natural father and mo- 


4 icceflors, as grand fathers and other an- 


a 


. Eber vrorim of DFeams. 6771 1 


1 Of the Baſon. 
Ke dream of a baſon, ſignifieth a good 
ny F maid : to drink or eat therein, 18. Woe 

of the ſervant: to ſee himſelf in the baſon -, 
as in the glaſs, is to haye cen by the 
10» ſervant. | 


ci OF the Image or reſemblance. 
ng A Statute or Image ' ſignificth children, 
zin and the will and affection of the 
fie dreamer. An Image of ſolid matter, and, 4 
10- not Totten, is better than the painted, or 
10-£ whe of the earth, wax, and ſuch like. i bat 

which befals the image, ſhull | befall Me... 

chfldren and affairs of the dreamer. 


"Of the Midwife, | 
Midwife ſeen in à dream, is a vali] 
4 X' ing of ſecrets, and hurt: It is death to 
the ſick ; for. ſhe always pulleth out that 
which is contzined from her which con- 
taineth it, and layeth it on the ground: 29 
to thoſe which are kept by force, it is li- 
od berty: ofen ſeen of her which is not with | 
ut child, ſignifieth ſickneſs to her. 


„1 , Of Thorns and Slings. ney 
Tings and thorns, are gri-fs, , impeach» . I 
ment, care and heavineſs; to many 


ey have ſignified love, and alſo _ injuries 
ls by wicked Perſons. AL * 


o | N *& 


— 


* 
OTIS F 
. 


% 


- THE Debt and the Creditor repreſenteth 


a ſcar, is an end and iſſue of evils, a 


- owe a life to nature our univerſal Mother, 


ditor. Sometimes the Creditor repreſents the 


1 


108 ARTIMEDORUS. 


Of a Chain. 
A Chain is a Wife, detaining all ſucceſs of F 
Affairs, and hindrance. l 


- Of Comfort. 
15 you dream you have comfort of any 


one, to the rich and, happy it is mishap 
- and Injury; co the poor and afflicted, aid and 


Comfort. 
Of a Wound, , 


SOR to dream to be wounded in the ſto- I. 
mach'or heart, to young folks, ſignifies 
love ; to old, griefs and heavineſs. In the 
Þ- of the right hand, is Debt and War ; 
by reaſon of the ſign that is made thereby : 
But new skin recovered in the Wound, called 


Of debt, the creditor, and the birer. 


life: Wherefore to the ſick the Cre- 
ditor urging and conſtraining, is great 
Danger; and receiving, is Death. For we 


which ſhe makes us reſtore and pay. The 
Creditor dying, is end of heavineſs. The 
renant or ſojaurner, * ſignifies as the Cre-. 


TI Oz TY . 1355 8. 8 


Daughter, which demands, her voy to 
Of 


2 


Fi Interpretation of Dream. 109 
Ty be a Fuol or a Druntard. F 
of YI} OR to dream to be a fool, is good to 


them which would und-rtake any buſi- 


neſs : for fools and madmen do that which 
ny cometh into their brain: It is alſo 
.* Flor Marſhals. and Sheriffs which would 
nd Fave Authority over the- People; for they 

ſhall have great Repute and Honour. It is 

alſo good for thoſe which would govern 
- Hand teach children; for Childten do -wil- 
„ Flingly follow Fools: It is alſo good for the 
poor; for they ſhall have Goods; for Fools 
e 
z 


catch of all ſides and all hands: To the 
ick it is health; for Folly makes Men go 
4 and come, not ſleep and reſt. But to dream 
"to be drunk, is very bad to all; for it ſig- 
nifieth great Folly : It is only good to ſuch 
ware in fear; for the drunken fear or doubt 

nothing. Of Letters ſent. 
ſee Letters, and that which is written 


poſition to things therein contained: But to 
ke them only, and not the contents, is 

news; for in every Letter, there is health, 
Good morrow, God have you in his Keeping, 
2 and ſuch like. 

plants and trees coming Mt of the body. 


of our Body is death, or Cutting to 
| kim 


within, fignifieth that one ſhall have diſ- 4 


por to dream that any Plant cometh out Y 


Fab R T T E DO RUS. 


him; Which is meant by that part fror 
whence the plant ariſeth. 


Of the Scab, Leproſte, and ob. 
Cabs, leproſie, and i:ch,..are ſigns of he 


nour and riches to the p2or:::to the ric 


and mighty, they are offices and dignities : | | 
is alſo revealing. of jecrets. But to fee anothe 
leprous and ſcabby, is anger and care; for a 
ugly and ill-favoured things, make ſad the 
| Apirit which look on them. i 

2 To caſt ſtones, or to be Sand, 

| © eaſt ſtones at any one, is to aſſail-wi 


words and Injuries : But. to be- ſtonec pc 


and hurt with ſtoncs, is to bear and ſuffel 


- Ofcentimes ic is a journey or flight; fer be 
Which is aſſailed with ſtones, muſt flye. Wher 
I there. are many which calt ſtones, this drea 
is good for him which hopeth for money, ot 

| Profs or commodity by many. 


1 N Graſbep. a 

55 S or crickets, ſignifie muſicians 

= To ſuen as are in neceſſity, they-neithet 

ig nifie friends nor ſupport, but only word: 

| _ talk of their affairs. To ſuch as are i 
fear, they are threats without eſſects: To the 

* gs they fignthe thirſt and death, _ 

To ſuffer. as another. 


0 be in pain and ſuffering as cen 
to be accellary and partaker of his offence 


= : Ihyarics; for ſtones repreſent injuries ſpeeches; 


x His Taterpretation of Dreams. 14% | 
and pain; for \ſickneſses and imperfections ll 
of the body, have reference to the paſſions 
and affectons of the ſoul, | 
| Of Dung. ' 
Vor to ſee dung, is good for thoſe which 
live upon the common people, and rea 
gains by them, and to ſuch as are of bale 5 
kt ite: it is alſo good for thoſe which have 
charge of public affairs. It is good for the 
poor to ſlcep on a dunghil ; for he ſhall. get 
and heap up ſtore of money : To the rich, 
It iS'publi:- eſtate, office, hanoũr; for the com. 
mon people always carry and caſt their ſu- 
perflutties on the dunghil. To be fouled with 
dung by any friend, is enmity with him, and 
mjury by bim; but by any ſtranger, it is 
great hurt to come. „ 

3 Of Prayers and requeſts. 5 
ern and requeſts of alms, of all beg- 

gars, poor. and miſcrable, are care and 
anger to thoſe which dream thereof z for 
dne requeſteth of another without affection, 
and none that are afflicted have reaſon and 
conſideration, by reaſon whereof they are 
Wimportunate, and cauſe trouble and hin- 
drance: and if they receive money for Wl 
ams, it iis a ſign of great peril and hurt; 
and death to the dreamer, or to ſome 
friend of his; poor folks or beggars en- 
ring into. a houſe, and carrying away 


„fick ; for it is their calling to divide and {cl 


12 ARTIMEDORUS. 


any thing. whether they ſteal it, or it be beat 
given them, fignify very great Adverſity. th 
Of. the Key. 

A KEY feen in a Dream, to him which 
would marry, ſignifieth a good and 
handſome Wife, or a good Maid. It is cross 
to a Traveller; for it ſignifieth he ſhall be d 
t back and hindered, and not received: Ii Ide 
is good for ſuch as would take in hand ora 
ehe other M.n's Buſineſſes, . 


07 4 Cock. 
ſee a Cock in the Houſe, is good to 
thoſe which would marry z for Marri- 
ages are not made without a Cock : It is alſo 
geod for the Poor; for they ſhall have Goods 
and Ability to keep a good and long Table: 
To the lick it is inflammation, heat and tears : 
it is alſo revealing of ſecrets; for a Cock's ap- 
* is white, and is ſeen of many. 
Of Cheſs playing. 

O dream that you play at Cheſs, is gain 

by lying and Deceit, To ſee another 
5 Play, is, that he ſhall ſuſtain Loſs by Craft. 


| B Of Butchers. 


Ucchers, which knock down, * kill cut, 
ſignify danger, and hurt, and Death to the 


and divide beaſt, and after ſell them, 


dead beaſts : To ſuch as are doubtful it is 
great 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 113 
reater doubt: To captives and bondſmen, it 
the iſſue of their evils. * 
O an inn-keeper. ent 4 
N inn-keeper, which Keeps a public 
inn, ſignifi th death to the ſick; he 
bert fore repreſcnteth death, becauſe like 
death, ſo he entertaineth all perſons: to 
thers it is trouble and heavineſs, danger and 
avel. The inn ſignifictn the ſame as the 
n-Keeper. «., 


To be kept and detained. 
O bz kept and d.tain:d by any one, is 
imprachment of affairs, and continu» 

ot ſickneſs to the ſick. Notwithſtand- 
ng, to thoſe which are very low, and near 
ie end, it is recovery of health, and conti- 
wance therein: for the keeping repreſents - 
fe, which ſhall be prolonged 3 but delive- 
ace, diſſolution and loſs, is quite contrary, 
nd death. To enter into priſon. ard captivity 
f bonds, either willingly,. or by force, is 
great ſi-knels, or anger. Serjcancs and hangs 
nen, are cap.ivity, hcavineſs, and revealing - 
if ſecrets to malefactors. | 
Of holy evens, jeys, and banquets, 
| made by night. _— 
He" Evens and feſtivals by night, mM 
are good for ſuch as would marry, 
ir make marrlages, and ſuch as ſeek com- 
| pany 


- fects: tothe rich and wealthy, they are trou 
ble and devulg tion 


* ** | -< . 

au ARTIMEDORUs. 
pany. and affinity: to the poor they are: 
lign of goods: to the ſad and featful, erq fie 
of heavineſs and fear; for nne wa: ch Wil pal 
lingly at night in dancing, good cheer, an 
mirth, but to thoſe wh ch ar: joyful; | ' Whore 
tmaſters ard harl ts, it is revealing of they 


_ SE Of places of aſſembly. 
IE Pl of plea, the market, theatres, high 
By ways, and great places in a town and 
ſuburbs, and. churches, are troubles and con 
fuſions, by reaſon of che mu'ticudes of people 
Which reſort the aforelaid places. A market 
filled with goods and folks, is good for thoſ 
' Which traffick : bur an empty market the 
$ N 5 


| of Statues. | 
Razen ſtatues being very big, ſeen mor 
ing in a dream, ae ricnes and revenues 
but excceding great oaes, and moving like 
monſters, are great terror and perils, becauſe 
one cannot ſce them without frighting. Sta 
tues alſo repreſent magiſtrates and governours 


of the town; and in this caſe, whatſoever 


they. ſhall. do or lay, mall baſal! the 
121 perſonages. | 
Of the Mele. 
He mole fignitierh a man blind by, incon- 
venience, and labour in vain ; and (ig 


i” nifieth Yr! 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 115 
ed fieth alſo, that he which would be ſecrets _ 
vil hall be diſcloſed by himſelf. 

5 -- Of nigbi birds. | | 
He madge:howlet, the owl, the bittern, 
the bat, and all other night-birds, 'crofs 
ny ent: rpr Ze or advancement of Affaics; but 
ke away fear and tcrrors: Only the bat 
good to women with child; for ſhe lays 
yt eggs as other Birds do, but little ones, . 
ind bears milk, wherewith . ſhe nouriſhes 
her young. If theſe birds are ſcen in a Dream 
Mio enter a houſe to dwell there, it ſignifieth 
that this, houſe ſhall be deſolate and forſaken: of 
lie inhaitants. He which goeth by Sea or 
Fland, and ſees in his dream any of | theſe 


hands of thieves. } 


Of the clock. © 5/4324 

A Clock ſignifics act ions, operations, 

motions, attempts, and ſurprizing in 

ny neſſary things, If a clock fall or break, 

t is il and great danger, eſpecially. to the 

Wick. It is ever better to count the hours be- 
fore noon, than after, 


The concluſion of th author upox. the 
third Book 
Ehold then, all which wanted, or which 
was not fit to be put in the two former ³ 
books, ſufficiently (as I purpoſe) are com- 
rife in the third book, And for this "0M 


0 


rde, he ſhall fall into a great tempeſt, or 9s. | | | 


I though it good to make this litt e book 


116 ARTIMEDORUS. WP 
apart, Jeſt I ſhould have omitted thoſe thing e 
therein contained; and by that means ſome * 
other might take occaſion either to write 8 
nather book of th s ſabject, or add to mine Ne 
But you muſt know, that there is nothing ae 
more tedious or difficult, than to undcr.tayd 
the div. rſity. compoſition, a d mixture of dreams 
and to preſcrib: gen ral rules for all kind off 
dreams; f.eing that ſometimes, nay often, 
one may tee the fame dream,; and at the 
fame time of the night or day, things con- 
trary, and which have no reſembl:nce or 
agreement: but it is impeſſible, that thing 
ſignified by the ſelf. ſame dreams, fuld dif- 
fer or be repugnant amongſt themſelves, it ſo 
be that dreams foret:l matters of import”: 
which ſhall happen. For as in all other" 
things there is an order and dependance ; I. 
fo allo it is very likely, that the ſame falls To 
out in dreams, When therefore one ſhall ſe lai 
in his dream things both god and evil, than hte 
he mutt thizk with himſelf, which were the the 
firſt, and laſt: for in worldly affairs, ſome- I 
times even the greateſt occaſion of hope have for 
had ill iſſue; and on the conrrary the great- th 
eſt cccafions of doubt and fear, have had 
good iflue 3 and tor great ev ls which one © 
hath expected, one hath found but ſmall; Im 
| and forvlittle hope, ef good one hach found be 
. | none 


one at all. So that mixed and compounded - 


Mily  underſtcod” or expourded; which is 
great grief to many. But for-my part, I 
ue wilt methodically, and in the beſt and 
Faſieſt order that I could, that every one 
night take an eaſi curſe in the expoſition 
dreams. And as ſchool-maſters, he they 
e taugbt heir children the knowledge nd 
ropcriy of any « ne letter in particular, after- 
ards t aching them how they muſt uſe 
hem all tog ther ; in like ſort would I pre- 
cribe certain wut le®and eaſie rules, and join 
ooffik:m to that whch hath been ſaid in my 
re former books, to the end that they may 


„euch as have h d. xpcrience, and long practice, 
erffihis will be very eaſie, and fhall ſuffice to 
e; Int. ut them in all things what they ſignifie. 


laid, that the head ſigrifies' the father of 
him that dreamed it ; and in the ſecond that 
the lion 
and in the chapter of death, that it is good 
ve for poor folks to dream that they die. When 
therefore any poor man (having his father 
nich) dreams that a lion comes to devour or 
tear in pie ces his head, and the fame poor 
man ſeems to remain dead, and without a 
head in his dream, tis likely that his — 


His Interpretation of Dreams, 117 


Fireams are very doubtful, and cannot be e- 


ſolbe the better Icarned and ur derſtood. For to 'F 


sro the purpoſe then. In cur firſt book we | | 


ſigmifieth the king; or ſickneſs: 1 


118 ARTIMEDORUS. 


3 books, not to accuſe or blame them before 


ſhall die, and he ſhall be his heir, and by this 
means ſhall forego the faintneſs of his poverÞ - 
ty, and become rich, ſeeing that he hat 
neither father nor poverty that ſhall keep him 5 
down longer. For in this dream the head 
repreſenteth the father; the loſs of the head 
the death of the father; the lion, the ſicknel 
whereot his father ſhall die. And death tc 
the poor man is change of eſtate, ſhewing 
that by riches. his povert ſhall be expelled 
In; ſuch ſort one muſt jead himſclf to the in 6 
terpretation of all divers and mingled dreams 
ef any whole chapter of ſpeech, gathering te 
gether, and making one only expoſition, like 
as ont medicine is made of many herbs and 


roots. To which intent, I deſire all courteX 
ous; readers; who are deſirous to peruſe mj 


£ they have diligently read and underſtood them 
* 7 am confident, and dare affirm with 
great ſecurity, that my books will. not be re 
jected by the learned and judicious readers 
nor by thoſe who are either Sow diligent 
or. Mandl ne readers, | 


The End of the Third Book, 


12 TIME BO RUS |} 


lis Expoſition of Rog 
DPR E AM S. 


F 9 — 1 a tt. th. tio * 2 


pH The Fourth Book. 


— —Y tt. 


. 8 P 
-_ Wn 


F the variety and diverſity if dreams. 

* dreams, ſome are ſpectulative, that 
is to ſay, which come (if one may ſo 
Mek) in the faſhion of the ſpirit, when 
te. body refteth : others are allegorical z 
nent is to ſay, which ſnewe:h under cther things 
or oſe things which they would ſignifie: and 
n We more hard to interpret, chicfly, becauſe 
itude is in doubt whether thi-gs will fall out 
re. che ſpirit hath repreſented them, or in ſome 
er manner underſtood by them. Where- 
re farſt of all we mult underſtand, that the 
ect of ſpectulative dreams will happen, or 
n aſter the dream: but the effect of al- 
gorical dreams appears ſome time after, ei- 
er long or ſhort, as a day or two. But it 
re fondneſs for any man to think, that 
anſtrous and impoſſible things ſhould hap- 
n as the dreamer hath ſeen them. And we 


75 
N 


moſt know, and note, that artificers „Meer 


120 ARTIMEDORU. 


preſent their art: as the attorney which 
dreamed. that another attorney was + fic 
was a Jong time. without clients; the ſmit|yor 
which drcamed that he ſaw a ſmith, whe 
"was his neighbour carried to the grave ot 
afterwards left his own ſhop, and the tou 
wherein he dwelt. But to ſpeak of anothe 
Apollonides, a c:yrurgcon, drramed that 
| fencing he had wounded many, and had pre: 
practice: for the intent of fenceis is 
wound, but not to kill; the like doth thi 
the chyrurg on. The ſick man dreaming 
ſaw bread ready to be ſet into the ov 
although the fruit of Ceres are ever gooc 
yet notwithſtanding, it ſignified to him 
great fever to come; becauſe thoſe loave 
were to be heated and baked in the oven, 
to him which would marry, or whigh 

would get affinity or company, it is bett 
to dream. of the vine and wine, than 
corn or bariey, and for him which deſife 

to advance himſclf, it is better to give th: 
to take any good, if he take ic not oft 
more apparent perſonages. 


; Of Buff. 
£ tes dream you fee of all forts of ſtul 
| which you can tie, truſs, or carry, eſp 
cially in doſſers, panniers, or a 8 
— er 


— 


- CO TEC CC ICY CRRxs 


1 


n Interpretation of rides,” 127 


> thoſe which would m 
ther affinity: but it is croſs to thoſe which 
ould make any voyages, run, or flie, or 


veſſhoſe which would ſurpriz- —_— and ule 
oy deceit or cunoing, | 


To meet folks. | 

O dream to meet or ſee folks, whether 
men or women, if they be ſuch as love 
Sis, or we love them, which are willing to 
b or have done us any 
d defire to hurt us, but wiſh us well, be they 


eher alive or dead, the dream is good: for 
which the ſpirit ſees or meets with, the 

ody ſleeping, they are kinds and images of 
to come; amongſt which our friends 
bg ric good, and or enemies the contrary 


i 8 . 


0 „ ill. 
ni 
0 F any man, re become. 
hath been rich, dreams that he- hath ſuch 


firſt eftate and FBI 


im in his houſe, or 


1n the de puties, tenants, or 


tul 
'p 


F 


poor after he 


nds and poſſeſfions | as he had before, and 
e ſame folk which he had before, are with 


armers, which he had in hi- proſperity upon 
is lands 3 his dream is good, for it fignfis 
at his goed fortune will reiurn. And on the 
ontrary, if a man now rich, dreams that he 
4 es or hath thoſe things which he had Wo: 


her chains, carcanets, &c. fignifie good 
, or make any ' 


ich fear to be ſurprized ; always excepting | 


good, and have had | 


| "208 ARTIMEDORUS. 


he was. poor ; it foretelleth bim, that he ſhal! * 
return to his, poverty, and that he ſhall have * 


I tuck. 

To judge that be. whom -we „ think i is our enemy 
is our friend, and the contrary., | _ 
Pi of © recreation, whither loved © 

thoſe that ſeen them in their ſleep, or 
which love them, and honour them, or bear 
them good will, although they have not: great 
-familiarity, and acquaintance together, fg. 
nie property and days,” of recreation to 
come: and on the contrary, thoſe which 
being ſeen in a dream, hate them which ſee 
them, although they are ignorant of their 
mier and ivin, ſignihe ill. So then, when 
8 ſee in a dream any perſonage which you 
el to be your friend, and the day after 

you have no proſperity, or good luck, then you 
may judge that he bears you no good: will, 
but that he is a diſſembler: and on the con- 
trary, if you ſee any 3 whom Aer ſuppoſe 
to be your enemy, and yet the day after 


you have good luck, 3 think wy it is 


wrong for to judge him your enemy, and 

you ought. not to bear either an ill eye, or an 

ill heart towards him. 

To ſee or meet tradeſmen, or - any pleaſant maid 

dat; or woman. 

"A. Ny. tradeſmen which one dreams that 

he fees or meets, hath the ſame effect 
ich , | + which 


7. 


ths" Interpretation of Dreams. 1234 WM 
aiich their Art; bath; and, the Gme ef 
VI is it to ce their; Shops. And yet you myſt 
excopt..a whore: For to dream that you. ſee. * 
mor. meet one, is a ſign of Joy,-and; ng ill 
Taream; but to ſce the brothel houſe — 
off e acteth her whoredom, is to dream of hea- 
orfivineſs and iil-luck, becauſe it is a : publick 
ar place, fall of trouble. „ 


g- Te o ſee littie Children, or young men (to wit) of 
to mean age, er od folks. _ 4 
ch . little children, it is better to 
dream you ſee Boys chan girls; and 
ir yet both import care, becauſe for little ones 
en we, muſt care. Litile children, or others of 
Ju middle age, ſcen in a dteam, are better than 
er Ito fee old folks: and Lo if the dreamer were 


Ju n any uſineſs to brivg witne ſs or to become 
il, ſurety, and defireth that men ſhould give 
n- {| credit to his words or writings, it were better 
ſe | for him to ſee folks of a ripe age, or old; pro- 
[vided always, that thoſe old folks do | nothing 

is in dotage, or upon an old grudge. 


Of trees and e. coming forth 7 or Tate 
C8 , alſc % of Iiving creatures, 81 


AMvorett low trees and plants, the Oak, 


ſuch ; in like fort, thc Elephant, the Raven | 
the | Hart, and their like, gpifie good. or evil 
to come, ſlowly, vording, to. che diſpo ition Wl 
Io and | 


the Olive, the Cypreſs-tree, and other 


"124 ARTIMEDORUS. 

aud different quality wherein. one ſecs them. || 
But the trees and plants which grow quickly, 
as the vine and the peach tree; and among 
beaſts, the Hog, and ſuch like, fignifie on the 
contrary fide, eicher good or evil, which ſhall 
— quickly happen. 6 ad fed t 


D Walls, foundatoins, and old trees. 
. ALL ſound and firm things, as walls, foun- 
_* © dations, and cid trees, and fluff of iron, 
and the I aditope, ate ſignifications of ſurety 
to thoſe that are in doubt and fear. 
e O Cbariots. 
NHariots which are not in uſc, as to dream 
to guide a Chariot drawn or carried by 
Wolves, Leopards, D:gs, or ſuch like beaſtyy 
is good only to'thoſe that fear great enemies; 
| becauſe ſuch beaſts when they are ſer be- 
_ tween a drought-tree, are ſubject to the gui- 
der. To dream to be carried therein by 
men, is good only to thoſe which would 
command, aud be obcycd z to others, it is 
diſcred:t and hurt. - 
Fa.. jy 
T. is good ho but ſuch as uſe it; to 
1 others, it is a ſign to be bad abaſed,. becauſe 
flatterers are leſs and baſer of courage than 
- -thoſe which uſe it not. To dream to be 
. pleaſant, and eafily endure to be flattered, is 
not good, eſpecially if. the flatterer be one 


of 


* 


His Interpretaion of Dreams 125 
n. of our familiars 4 for it r to be We Y 
73 f trayed by him. | 
* To be fold. r 
11 Or to dream to be ſet to ſale (as ey! 
were wont in old time to fell their 

ſervants, and thay do at this day amongſt 
heathen nations) is good to thoſe which wi 

to change their prelant eſtate and quality; as 
„ {9 thoſe which are kept in poverty and fer- 
„ {| vitude : but to the rich, and the fick, and 
JI thoſe which are placed in honour and autho- 
rity, it is ill: and after this dream it hath 
fel} out, that many have been taken and 


ſold. 
To Buy. 
To dream to buy all ſorts of things which 
| one uſeth, is good. To buy that which 


Is only for victual and relicf, is good for the K 
af poor. But to the rich and wealthy, it * 'Þ 
/ (Xpence and great Charge. : 1 
* i To Get. 


| dream to get and heap up Oe and 

N fair houſhold-ſtuff, — well⸗ 
„ and much, or any more than we | 
had b. fore, is good; but not moſt excell-nt, 
above our eſtate and quality; for this would 
be without reaſon, * would ſignifi: much 
hurt. F 3 s T vt 


k 


"M0 


"126 ART HH ο 


Of poverty. -- 
4 . to be in neceſſity Ae 
fignifieth ſome good to one; and yet 


* th i briggs no good; but ſignifcth croſs 
fortune to thoſe wh ch ike co W of 
their Tongue and fair Speech, | ke 


of things which.one dreams to 2 little char 
7 * beyond their age. 

| 0 dream of any Thing to befal little 
Cahildteg, Which is not prop r to their age, 
18 nat go. 3.48 to die am that. men chile ron, 
have bcards and gray haits, and that little 
wenches ſhould be married and have children; 


Ib. 


which ſignifioth to them death at hand. And 


yet to dre am that little Children, ſpeak well, 
is 
omen io ſpeak. But as for other, Things 
Popaing beyond their age, in hole Which 
Ar not very itkle children, it wis declared 
ia the firſt book, in the Chaprer-of Altzration 
and change. Dreams which are of the 
Generation of children, or of wed. tings; foretel 
that dor ehidreh being in a far country, ſhall 
returo; 'cfprefatly the wife and children, if 
| by chance any one hath took them from 
us: If one dreams ta plough the earth, my 


fow {red therein, it lignificch the ſame. 


118 
1 | 2 Bos, 


That 


. 


gocd ; b<cuule iis proper both to Men and F* 


Y, | | oftentimes the ftenifier of the ſame thing. ns 


whereupon a Woman dr-aming that her 


of Eyes were fore, found her children fick : And 
znother dreaming that her children were ſick) 


had after fore eyes. . ee, 


A LL vomiting, whether of blood, meat, A 
or fl-gm, to poor folks, if they dream, it 1 


ſign fi tu profit, and to the rich hut; for the 
firſt can loſe nothirg till they have it; bat 


lofe them. 
To ſee or have of ten the ſame dream. 


nights oc after another, is a ſign that 


n great Affeckion to any thing, we cannot 
© Fbut think and ſpeak thereof. But if the 
ame Dreams are ſern with long ſpace of 
Ieme between them, they do not always ſig- 


if nie the ſame thing, but divers, accordiag to 
uche change of Time and affairs, either 


4 more or Jefs : Taough many have dreamed 


the ſame: Dream, it will not ſignifie to all 


Jake, but rather diverſly, according to 
t || the divers eltate aud quality of the folks, and 
. ö 3 


et THE eyes ſignifie and repreſent children, 


le che others having goods already, ſhall come to 


Jour ſpir.t' doth ad moniſh and foretell us 
affectionately the ſelf ſame thing worthy: if 
to be th-ught upon: For when we have 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 127 | 
iar, wbich is fignified by any one thing,” is alſo | 


NO ſee often the fame Dreams, and many | | 


— þ . 


1 


* perſpicuous piace of all his Face. Whefe- 


- © which one uſeth to put th:rein: As tuns 


14128 ARTIME D O R US. 
their different affairs. A certain Perfum@ 
-  Oreamed that he had loſt his Noſe, and he 

| loſt his Merchandize, and fold no more; the 

Jos of his noſe ſigniſying his Perfumes. A long 
time after, being no Perfumer, he dreamed 
the fame dream, that he had no noſe, and 
he was afterwards accuſed for Falſhood, and 
fl d out of his Country; for it is an unſcemly 
thing to lack a N-ſe, which is the moſt 


upon Virgil 1 ith, Et truncus in boneſto vulnere 
nares, The ſame Perfumer being fick upon a 
time after, dr.amed agun that he had no 
Noſe, and he dicd ; for dead men's heads have 
no noles. S» that the ſelf.ſame dream in 
th ſelf fame Man, ſigu ifi d diverſly threeff the 
ſev: ral Times: Firſt, lofs of his Merchandize : co 
S. condly, loſs of his Honour: And thirdly,f] no 
loſs of his lite. 
J Of veſſels and inſtruments.” 

TD V.ry veſſ i or inftroment, figaificth the tie 
E, Arcor Trade whezein it is ut. d, or that e 


_ fignifie wine or oyl, heaps of corn and barley, 
or ſuch like thirg, ſomewhat near or equi- 


valent to what thereto it is applied: The 7 


to is and inſtruments in this ſenſe fignifie St 
Friends, Children, Parents. Victual and Pro- UC 
| viſion, fignifics the Maſter of the Houſe 15 — 
AE ors, | N er 


| | 


| His Interpretation of Dream. 129 
Coffer and Cabinets,” the Wives and the Ste- 
uiring à charge 


rds. 
or conduct of ſome men , war, Oreamt 
nd] that being called of one, he went out of the 
nd} Houſe wherein he was, and having gone 
ly down two ſtair, he thought that he 
t which called him, re: ch:d him a Crown of © 
e- Olives, ſuch as the Roman Kaighis uſed ro: ⁵⁶ 
re wear in their pomp : After which Dream he 
aff was very joyful, and all that were of his com- 
a0 pany were in hopes that by this Dream he 
ould have his requeſt; but he had not; and WW 
inf the reaſon thereof was, becauſe he received not 
ex] the Crown in going up the ſtairs, but in 
e: coming down; for to aſcend fignifieth Ho- | . 
| 


, nour, to deſcend, the Contrary. Notwith- 
ſtanding, this Dream fignified another 


thing to him, to wit, that he ſhould marry $ 

and eſpouſe a Maid; fot the crown was of 
gel tied Branches. Wherefore he which ex- : 
at | poundeth Dreams, muſt not reſt in one thi 
is only, but he muſt und.rſtand all the diſpo- 
fition and derivation of them, For thoſe 
which judge of this Dream only. by the 
Crown, without regarding the deſcent of the i 
Stairs, were all deceived in their - Exgecta» if 


tion. 


» ſr 

F 

of N 
N 4 £ 

— : : 1 


e . N B * U . 


2 his Ip 
Tr LL" thoſe which are of one Partntaze 
el pecially children, being re preſented by 
=: — having gor doing any thing; fignifie 
that ſomething ſhall be done, or fall out, com- 
ing near the ſaid things, to whomſoever of his 
Kin it happen. A man dreamt that his 
beer was crook-backt, and the ſiſter of 
the dreamer died; and not without Cauſe ; 


Of parentage. | 


for he dreamed, that fich:a near Kinſman” was flkni 


not well: ſhortly after which his ſiſter part 


Sa 


Of things which emempaſs. 


Al thoſe things which encompaſs us 
or receive us, have the fame conſide- 
- ration: As one dreamt that he was a 
relled in a gown of wood; new he failed, nt 
his failing or voyage was hindered. for the 
vn of wood hindering him, repreſented 
the Ship. Another dreamt his Gown was!“ 
cut into ſmall Pieces, and his houfe fell down. 
Another dreamt he had loſt the Roof of his 
Houſe, and he loft his Cloaths. A mariner 
dreamt he ſaw a wall break, and the pieces 
and ſides of the Ship were broken. And 
yet all ſuch things may have reference to 
the body. And therefore not without Cauſe, 
one which dreamt that his Gown was broken 
and tor, Was worded in the body, and i 0 
— the 
3 ſe | 


e His Interpre retation of Dreams. © 131 


the ſame places where he dreamed his gown 


vas torn 3 and as the gown ſhewed it ſelf to Y 


, Ide the cauſe of the ſou] : In like fort ſervants 
y E(belide, other things which they may ſigni- 
ie ne) repreſent the bodies of their maſters: 
Wherefore there was one who dreamt he 
aw his Servant ſick, and was ſick himſelf of 
Fever; and the Body is the Servitor of the 
dul, which ſeeth the dream. Another dreamt 
he had a Horſe Foot, and was afterwards J. 
mnighted 3 for as his Feet bare him, in like 
ſort the horſe ſhould carry him. He which 
 Ureams the King will give him ſomething 


that there ſhall be ſome Sentence given, or 
. {Word ſpoken, which ſhall redound to the 
1 Profit of the Dreamer. 


Of imper feli or half finiſhed Works. 

22 dream that Works are only half 

done, ſignifieth evil Succeſs of Affaire, 
Jad it were better not to begn them. Ciléx 
making a requeſt to the King to have the 
ſucce ſſion of his brother, dreamt that he ſhore 
ſheep to the middle of her body; and taking 
great deal of the fleece, awaked, dreaming 
it he could not obtain to ſheer the reft® 
After which: dream, he expected to obtain 
the Moiety of his brother's Inheritance; but 


n len the contrary, he neither obtained it all 
je Inor any Part thereof, o O 


out of his Mouth, muſt thus interpret it, 


132 ARTIMEDORUS. 
| Of Tun. 
*T 


O dream to ſce Towns whereto one ref] 
ſorcs, is better than to ſee ſtrange Towns 
eſpecially if they be Towns of his on. coun 
try, and thoſe wherein one hath had good 

fortune and . proſperity z and above all, iti 

to ſee them well peopled, and filled 

-with inhabitants, goods and merchandize 

by which things one may know the Honou 

- +» and Riches of the Towns. Parents allo are 
fignified by the Towns were we make ou 

relidence. As for example, a man dream 

that his Country and place where he wal 

born, was fallen down and ruinated by ar 


Earthquake; and his Father was conde Intec 
to death, and exceuted. 


If it be pefſle at the ſame Time to have good af 
5 bad dreams. 
As may dream both good and bat 
dreams in one and the ſame night: Na 
more, in the ſelf-fame dream one may ſee 
both good and bad things, which the Inter 'p 
preter muſt ſeparate in Judgement. And it i 
no marvel, fince the life "and affairs of one 
1 icular man is ſuch; that is to ſay, mingle 
| +, ordinarily with good and evil, and in th 
ſiame time one may do and ſuffer both good 
andevil. Neither Tank we be always contentſ tt 
with one only iſſue of our Dream, beecauſeſ ti 
3 | 8 | 


46 n , ; . | 
H Interpretation of Dreams. 133 
it hath not always the like effect; wherein 
Antipater, an interpretcr of dreams, often 
deceives himſelf-: for when any one dreams |! 
that he embraced iron, it fig ifieth that he | 
ſhould be impriſoned, and ive among irons. | 
The good Aatipater to another which hath 
the like dream. will interpret that at 
eq a particular combat in a cloſe ficld, he fhall 
e be condemned; or he ſhall keep a fencing- 
uy ſchool, and live as it were among, and by 
IF iron; to wit, by the «exerciſe and art of 
uy fencing, where one doth nothing but han- % 
die daggers and ſwords of iron: tv whom # 
a" notwirhſtanding this fall not out, but he had 
Us a memb-r cut of. Whercfore we muſt not | 
always reſt at one _ l pars or effect that 
hapneth (for it were to d al with beaſts, or as 
fidlers that can play bur one tune) but we 
muſt be ingenious to deviſe every Day divers 
things; and they muſt not in all points be 
divers, but ſomewhat alike : For our Spirit 
J and Nature are fertile, and recreate and 
ſport themſelves in variety. 


„ That our brethren do fignifie our Enemies. 
R brethren have the ſame fignification 
as our enemies, as touching the effect 

ind event of dreams: and our enemies, on 
the other fide, have like eff. ct with our bre 
cy thren. And not without reaſon, becauſe our 
_ 3 brethren 


** 
Ti 
1 
Mi 
14 
J. 
ti; 
= 2 
14 


% 


* 


334 AN T IM E DON US. 


- - brethren bring vs nothing when they are er a 
born, but diminiſn our inheritance and 
' Buccefligh, asd are the cauſe that thoſe things i 
which ald be all our own, are divided in- hot 
to many parts between them and us. Timo-Not. 
crates dreamt that he buried, or - cauſe to be er. 
ne, one of his brothers departed ; and a Wa 
little afi ter one of his adverſaries or Enemies 
died. And the death of our brethren fignifi- 
eth not only loſs of our Enemies; but alſo de- N 
| liverance, or acquittance from ſome "loſs or 
hurt which attended us; and ' whereof we 
Rood in fear: 1 it happened to Diocles the 
grammarian, who ſuſtained no loſs of Money, 
- Whicreof he ſtood in doubt and was afraid, 
becauſe he Pong before, that he fa his bro- 
ther dead. 


of 2 nnn, reviving, and; mounting to 


| beaven. . x. 
Wes to ſee, nor to eat ſuch meat as one 

ems is prepared for the feaſts of the 

dead, is not good to dream. Neither in like 

ſott to dream that you make ſuch a fraſt for 
yout parents or friends; for it ſignifieth and 
froretelleth to the ſick his own dcath, and to 
dim which is in health, the death of ſome fa- 
miliar friend of his. Fo dream to dye, and 
aſterwards to revive, is not ill, but fignificth Þ 


— Such things! as one hath cuſtom to of- 


fer 


B Hiterpretadun vf Dreams. 135 
re er and preſent in oblation for the Deceaſed, ho | 
1d ſhot a good Dream, cither to offes them, or 


83 pke of them; for it ſignifieth * x 
nG.. - 
11 


!1- Wo "the cCreamrr, ar tb lome of h is Parks 
2- Motwichſtanding to take Sat, gold 
ter, apparel and veſſels from the * of the 
cad, whether it be al:ogether, or at divers 
ges is a good dream, and a ſign of profit. 
But to dream he mounts to heaven, for him 
which is ſtck-is death; in like ſort to be in 
great tranquility, reſt ad happincſs. 
; Within what Time dreams comm. | 
LL. things which are wont to have a 
certain determined time, and are. ſeen 
In a dream, muſt be referred to that Time: 
And other thi gs which have no cert.in nor 
determinate time, to that time which their 
effects will ſhew. And we muſt judge ot the 
ime. far or near, according to the circum» 
nces of the Dream: For he were à Fool, 
at would refer to à year the effect of a 
Man' 's dream, which is conſtitutedↄ either in 
great pain, great hope, or great Fear. And 
re muſt know, that the things which a Man 
urea ms to ſee afar off (as it were about Hea- 
ren) have their effects more ſlow, by rea- 
ſon of long diſtance. - Morcover we muſt not 
Ie ignorant, that good or evil Dreams bga fie 
to the yu or little, 2 or Iſſer ban o 
evil. 1 81 
: Toe End of the fourth book. 


* Man dreamed that he drank Muoſtarc i 
. A ſo well ſtampt, and ſo clear, that i 


- was all changed into Blood: (a dream ve ou 


Certain Examples of Dreams, with their Effe 


""ARTIMEDORUS 
His Expoſition of RS 


D R E A M $ﬆ 


d 11 
he | 
ſer 
hug 
He | 


— 


The Ff al Book. © 


11 ENCE — 
"ou 


_ 
t 


which followed. 


was potable: It fell out that ond 
d ard coined a certain Accuſation i 
cale of a crime of Ma „ Where 
wien he was fo well charged, and ſe at 
"tained to the quick, that he received Sen 
tence of Death, and was executed by JuſticeFÞ 
Another dreamt, that the Water ef the Ri 
ver Xanthus, which is near Troy the Great 


ry fearful and marvellous :) What then fel 
_ out? He caſt blood at d vers times for te 
Years together, ard dyed thereof, By whic 
appears, that great Rivers ſtay not, but dq he 
continue and hold out their Courſe. A man FC 
-dreamt that his Cuſhion or feather bed wah 
full of corn - inſtead of feathers : He had n 
"0 oy never — had any child, anden 

that 


" El Interpretation of Dream. 137 
eee and bare him a ſon. A- 
ther dreamt he lighted a candle, at the 
oon, and he — blind: For he dreamt 
thing impoſſible ; Beſides the moon hath 
o light of her own. A woman dreamt that 
he ſaw within the moon three images, or 
ſemblances like herſelf : She bare three 
hughters, which within a month died 4 for 


ſaw his image or repreſentation in - the 
noon,” and he made long voyages, wandering | 
his way. and that way a long time: For the 
votinual change of the moon ſignified that 
z ſhould often change his place and habi- 
45 A man dreamt his privy members were 
pf maſſy i iron ; and he had afterwards a ſon, 
whom he was lain ; for iron by its own 
2 conſumes it felt. A man dreamt an O- 
ve - trret came out Bf his head; and he fol: 
wed the ſtudy of philoſophy, with great con- 
ag . and got everlaſting knowledge and ho- 
: For this is a tree always green and 


hom he loved above all the reſt, was chan- 
kd into a torch or flame; and he loſt his 
| oF and was led and guided by that ſer- 
Want. A ſervant dreamt he 2 a ſtar fall 


| m Haves, and another come out of the 
. _ ww . 


8 


N 


he moon hath a months life. A man dreamnt 


bod, and by all dedicated 10 the Goddels , 
inerva, reputed the Goddeſs of Wiſdom, 
certain man greamt that his ſervant ' | 


238 ARTIMED O'RS S. 
_- earth and, fly op to Heaven; his xhiſte 
died, and his maſters fon rofe up in his ni; 
ſters place.” Abother having his ſiſter ri 
and fick, dreamt that before her door gre 


u fig-trec, ſrom whence he guhered fevel 


black figs, and eat them: Hs ſiſter deccaſct 
ſeven days after, and made him her heir. 


man dreamt he had caft his ſkin, and'relf 
- - hewed.- it as a ſcrpent; and the day after h 
- = died + For the ſoul which muſt leave the boſſk 


Ay, rep reſents fuch like viſions to it in 
= Urtam. A other dreamt tnat his fache 
drew his filter, being married, from he 
huſband; and gie her in marriage to aF 


ther, and he died ſoon after; for his fathef 


repreſented Gd the Creator, Heavenly Fe 
ther, of our fo''ls, his fiſter r pr. ſented th 


ſoul of him that dreamt it, which ſiſter beſo 
- . Tg ſepuared from her ſpouſe, and giving th 
another, ſeemed to fay that ſhe ſhould-b. ſh 


parated from her body, and ſhould live 3 
converſe elſewhere 3; fiznityi:g that the ſou 
of 'thoſe Which dic, do nothing but charg 
their place. A man dreamt that he waggre: 
with-child, and that he was delivered of tw 


black daughters; and he loſt bo h his «yeh 
in the-ſight of them. For his two eye: ic; 


thit covered his eyes, fell down. A ſon be 

ing far from his country, dreamt that his ow 
mother bare him again; he returned into hi 

(7315.71 | - 1 


owl 


: | 


2 E, Titer phetativn of Drinks. 139 


n country, found his mother fi k, and 
3 made her heir by her death and will. 
is dream fign/fied as much to bim, to wir, 
t by lis mothers means he ſhould come 
Yom poverty to riches, One dreamed thawhe 
his bread ſteep d in boney, and he there- 


on gave his mind to the ſtudy of philoſb- 


y. a d theieupon got wiſdom, honour, and 
pods : The honey there fore by its ſweetne s, 
znified the ſweetneſs of wiſdom, and the 
ead wea'th... Another dreamt that from hs 
o mach there came cars of corn, and that 
te was ene which pluckt them out: He 
nad two ſuns. which on after him died. 
% dreaining on a time, that by miſchance 
ſlipped into a pit of water, whereupon 

chywäch the ſmall of big Ig Was ternal 


So white marole, and after a while de- 


ſed of a dropſie: Who fees: not by this 


bin example, that recourſe of wateriſh 
mours to the weakeſt pirt, had made a 
rtain coldnefs and ſt ffneſs in the place, 
ich the party felt more eaſily in ſleep, for 
rers reaſons which before have been d 

req. Another dreaming that he ſwam 
inſt" a bloody ſtream, was cured of a plu- 
e. And her dreaming that he app:ared all 
fire like Hercules's furies upon a ſtag); fell 
at very day into a burning ague. Ode drcam- 


So over night, before he fhould run at olym- = 


pus, 


* 
— 


0 
— "- 
+ SF - 


* 


12 — 
— 


. 
— ——?— a — — — — 
——— — — —ũ—— IC — — - 
. 4 : 0 4 
> 


24 ARTIMEDORUS. 
pus, that he was an eagle ; met with an 


terpeter, who concluded hereupon, | 
cauſe an eagle was the prince and lead 
of all birds, he ſhould prevail: Anoth 
took not fo great hold upon the quality a 
kind of the bird, which ſhews a courage 
attempt ; as of his place in coming aſter : 
the flock : Which declares a kind of heaz 
metal, with want of agi ih. 
' The End of the Fifth Book of 


4 
he 
MW: 
y 
: 


id 


tc 


f } ARTIMEDORUS. 2 
: s 4 ＋ « 4 | | 

| AN EPITOMY I. 
r | 


| PAL ERIUS MAXIMUS 
4 | And others, Concerning yf 


5 = EA M F 


6 the 8 Auguſtus and Calphurnia th 
| A 8 Artorus, phyſiciin to the Empero ble 
"ob Auguſtus, lay in his bed, the night ben 
fore the armies of the Romans (nameP 
ly, the Hoſt of Auguſtus and Mark Anthon 
on the one party, and the Bands of Brutuſ ir 
and Caſſius on the other) were to fight the 
battle i in the FOOT Fields; Pallas — 
tec 


4 5 = 4 4 
i 5 1 
mn 8 N 5 | | . 
- 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 141 
herfelf to this jaid phyſician, command- 
him to tell Auguſtus, that although he 
s very ſick, he ſhould not fail, hut be pre- 
vt at the battle. Which Auguſtus under- 
ding, he left his tent (being carried in 
ter, though he could not fight for the vic- 
. Preſcnily the Soldiers of Brutus's ar- 
ſurprized his pavilion. And al hough Au- 
tus had reſolved not to ſtir out of his tent, 
the reaſon of his ſickneſs ; nevertheleſs by 
admonition of his phyſician, by this means 
ſaved his life; For the folders of Brutus 
ned chiefly at his tent, ſuppoſing to have 
Ind him there. Bit becauſe this emperor 
vs Wiſc, ſubtie, and adviſcd in all his acti- 
„ the example of his adopted father and 
SedeccfTor Julius being yet freſh in his mind, 
rſwaded him to obey the dream of his 
hyſician : For he well knew, that Calphur- 
a, the wife of Julius Cæſar, had ſeen - 
her flcep the night before he was ſain, 
it he lay wounded in her arms and boſom 
Ich many wounds; by reaſon of which hor- 
ble dream, ſhe intreated him not to be 
n the day fallowing at the- court. But he 
willing to give ear to a womans dream, 
Fought rather to go to, the ſenate, and 
in parliament 3 where he was put to death; 
ing miſerably wounded with more than 


- 
e * 


Ee 


enty wounds. Likewiſe a ſoldier dream. | | 


W 


* 

A 

3 
"4 

- 1 

-£ 

. 
:- 


5m ed thar Julius Ceaſer told him, that Octayi 


e c 


- ſhould: win the battle againſt the Philippiaugega! 


if he catried fometing about him that Mit 
was "uſed to wear: Upon this dream Odq ith 
vius worte bis ring, and ſo both then ane tt 
alterwards got the victory. | {eto 
"18.2640 10 213; 1: * * e 
Of Publius Decius, and Manlius Torquatuſſe a. 
8 Conſuls f Rome. 

He viſion which appeared in ſleep all i C 
f the ſame night, to Publius Decius, an 


Manlius Torquatus, was of great admirationfuri 


wiyg ſoever ſhould firſt ſeem to ſtoop: unde 


of che, one army, their captain, ſhould“ t 


and manifeſt iffue, For then when theſe twHor| 
conſuls pitched a field near the hill Veſyyhm 
us, v2. When the Latines left the fide of tie 
Romans ; to each of theſe two conſuls ſleep. . 
ing, appeared a man, and told, them, - tha l 


ſlain ; and of the other a great. companſhge 
ſhould: be diſcomfited : But the chief of thStrt 
hoſt-that fhould aſſail the troops of the enqgþd 
mies, and vow to ſuffer death for the": felliffe \ 


they ſhould have the victory. Hearing thi 


news, and all waking from their ſleep, the. 
conſuls, made a covenant together, that whaſſoo 


ay 


the burden of the battle, the captain of thaſid 


band ſo diſcomfited, ſhould lay down his 1 
for hs country. And aithough neither the 
one nor the other teared; this adventure, yt 
7 | | ws art 


* 


ers 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 143 
je Chance fell pon Decius; for, his troops 
pan to be out of heart; which he ſeeing, 
aſt h mſelf in the middl. of his enemies . 
ith his word in his hand, and was flain. 
v the Romans had the triumphant and deſired 
tory againli the Latines, by the death of 

e of. the chicf -, captains, follow. "S up 
eam. 


a 
a 


tu 


| if 


an 


„ Accia. ; 

cia being wich child of the emperor Octa» 

vius, dreamed that her bowels were 
urid vp to Heaven, and ſhewed over all he 
ord-. And aft:rwards her ſon Octavius be- 
me a famous empcror, renowned over, all 
le - world. 
Ep ; Of Cicero. 
hi 1 Uuy being baniſned Rome by * cohs. 
ſpiracy of his enemics, went to a vil-, 
ange; and in his ſleep ſeemed walking by de- 
hrt places, to meet with Marius, then conſul, 
nd his troops; who demanded of him, "why | 
was ſo ſ{;d; And the cauſe why he haunt - 
hi thoſe. d-ſarts, and was ſo tranſported ind 
eh unknown way? And. after he had under- 
hood the many injuries which Tully had un- 
2 


# *» 


Poor: he took him by the right hand, 
gave charge to the principal of his. offi, 
Fr 4 to lead him to his chappel; telling him 
thile ſhould there hear ſome good news of the 
ye ſtoring of his eſtate. Wejurh fell out in like ; 
th mnner + . 


2 = 5 7 


4 
| 


- 144 ARTIMEDORUS. 
1 
| 


5 Bd. 


had cauſed to be built, the Senators fat 


$ thing thereof remained ; ſhewing therebi w 
his childrens fortunes. For Ecclinus the“ elf lis 


manner: For in that Chappel which Maris 


council concerning the return of Cicero 


And it was concluded that he ſhould returldre 


ſaſe and found, without any charge or diſhqnet 


nour. | afte 
2-5 Of Caius Cracchus. dre 
AS Caius Cracchus flept, he dreamed Haft. 
he ſaw his brother Tiberius, telling hiqwa 


that he ſhould be killed, as himſelf had bee tar 
_ beforez many heard that he made account qa 

this dream, eſpecially before he was mad 
Tribune of the people, in which office he 


ſee 
hit 
received his death, agreeable to his brothers. |ki 
. C Ecclinus. ö thi 
Cclinus, a Roman, dreamed the firſt nighl ca 


after his marriage, that Rome was ſcateq ia 


- , on a hill that grew higher and higher, untq ri 


an exceeding great h:ght, and afterward}ſa 
ſhrunk away like melted ſnow, ſo that noſ cc 


deft ſon won Verona and other Cities; ang th 
Elber ick the younger brother was as victori 
ous : Bnt afterward Ecclinus was taken Pri 
ſoncr, and fo died; and Alberick having ſec” 
ſix ſons ſlain, his wife - and two daughter Al 


 _ burned, himſelf alſo died : Their wholSt 


ſtock, like the aforeſaid hill being utterly'v 
_ diffolyved and extinguiſhed. HAD 
aer . ; 8 


2 


Of His Interpretation of Dreams. 145 
arid / Arthur Rous. 
t HERE being a prize to be play'd at 
ro Syracula, Arthur Rous, a Roman knight, ⁵ 
turjfdreamed the night before, that a carrier of 
iſhqnets or a fiſher ſhould kill him. The day 
after he was at the combat, and told his 
dream to the defendants, It fell preſently 
| Hafter, that near the place where this Arthur 
hiqwas, they came to bring in the two comba- # 
deeftants, one whereof carried for his deviſe 
it da Fiſh upen a Hook. When Arthur had 
ad ſeen the face of this Fiſh ; he ſaid unto  Þ 
ref him, I dreamed to night that you ſheold 
Skill me. And ſo he would have departed 
thence, doubting ſome wicked aitemp, be- 
igh| cauſe of his dream. But the combatants giv- 
ate jag him thei words of affurance, he car- 
intq ried the hazard of his death: For in the 
ard ſame place the Fiſh vanquiſhed the other 
noſ combatant, and thinking o run him trough 
eb with his ſword, the blow glanced aſide, and 
"el lighted on poor Arthur, who miſcrably in 
and this caſe tried the effect of his dream. N 
ori O Hannibal of Carthage. - 


Pri Annibal ſleeping had ſuch a Viſion, that 
ſect} ©” he ſeemed. to ſee a fair young maid, like 
terf an angel, which was, ſent unto him from 
xl Heaven to conduct him to aſſail Ialy. After 
rl which turning himſelf, he ſaw a great Serpent, 
which by force and violence broke all that he 

8 G + encountered 


o 

2 

5 1 
- = 


* ” — 


his heart that he ſhould die by this means, before th; 


146 ARTIMEDORUS. 
encountered; and after him came Lightning an 
'Tempeſtuous' Rain, which darkned tne day. The 


Hannibal being affrighted; demanded of this fair Mai, bi 
what marvellous Viſion this was, and what it ſignified 


2 
„ 


And the young Maid anſwered him, thou feeſtt 4 
ruin of Italy 3 wherefore ſay not a word, and lea # 


the reſt to the deſtinies I need not here declare wh: 
evils Hannibal did in Italy, following this dream. h 
| Cf Alexander the Great. N 
: How well was Alexander King of Macidon 
admoniſned in his fleep, that he ſhould tag þ 
bettet guard of his life, if fortune would have ſufterefÞ] 20 
him to bave uſed this counſel to avoid this danger 5 
For certainly be knew by his dream, before he fe 
the effect, what the hand of Caſſander ſhould be ve 
nemous and mortal to him, and he was perſwaded i 


ever he ſaw him. Always after that dream, whenſ: 
ever Caflander came into his court, and preſente J 
_ himſe'f to him, he remembred when he looked upc 
him, that his was that perniciods face which he ha 
ſeen in his ſleep, Notwithſtanding, knowing th 
he was the ſon of Antipater, he drove all fear and ſu 
picion away by his courage; ever repeating Gree 
Verſe, which ſaith, that men muſt not have reg: 
of dreams; although notwithſtanding all that, t 
poy ſon was then prepared to kill him: And Mea hol 
That be died by the hand of the ſame Caſſander. 
; 3 Of the Poet Simonides. 2 
i T HE deſtinies were more favourable to the Pc 
1 Simonides, than to that great Monarch Ales 
ander, who advertiſed and counſelled him from abov 
being aſleep ; and after his awakening, he took hi 
ſelf td this conſideration. For aſſoon as the Sh 
© wherein he was, was come to the Haven, and they. 


His Interpretation ”f Dreams. - 1 


= found the Corps of a dead man without burial ; he 
took compaſſion on the Corps, and cauſed hini to be 
buried. The nrght following he dreamed that he 
ſaw him whom he had buried, fore warning him that 
the day after he ſhou“ n t go to Sea: Whereupon he 
ſtayedwat home on the Land, and his fellows (which 

„J would needs put to Sea) were the ſame day all caſt 
n away by a great Tempeſt that aroſe at ſea; wherefore 
he was very glad, for having had ſo much credit to 
the dream in caſe of life, more than to a poor Ship. 
Afterward acknowledging this benefit, he made his 
Benefactor immortal by his poetry, building him a 
better ſepulcher, and which might make him remain 
longer. in mens memory, than that which he had built 
for him among the ſands of the Sea, in a deſolate and 
unknown place. 


Of Policrates's Daughter, | 
T HE Daughter of Policrate Samius, the Tyrant, 
r that her father hanging on high, was by 
Jupiter waſhed, ny by the Sun anointed, Afterward þ 
being overcome b Oretes, he was hanged on a Gib- 
bet, waſhed by the rain, anointed by the Sun which 


melted his hs 3 ſo that he ſeem ed thereby to be 
anointed. 


Of King Crce(us. 

TH. dream which at the firſt exceedinly a f ehted X 
the Soul of King Croeſus, and always after — = 

him very fearful and doubtful, was exceeding, mar- 
vellous, and of great force and efficacy: For of two 
- ſons which he had, the luſtier, which was beſt en- 
lie riched with perfection of Body, and which was td 
©F® have the Crown after his father, he dreamed that be 
was killed with a ſword : Wherefore to hinder (and 
85 if it might be) to divert this ill-luck, the good father 
hell ceaſed not to give or, by no means poſſible, This 


© TS. _ 


» 


1343 ARTIMEDORVUS. 
young prince, called. Atys, being before accuſtome@rov 
to go to War, was by his father conſtrained to kee im 
the Houſe. He had a chamber furniſhed with all In Hun 
ſtruments of war, which his father made be kep lit 
from him : He had his guard well armed and weaponet 
with ftaves, all which his father commanded not te 
Come near him. And notwithſtanding all, the deſtinie 
made way for ſorrow and grief : For when a great and 
wild ' Boar waſted the goods of that Country up 
Mount Olympus, and flew many of the Inhabitant 
thereof; behold the countrymen aſſembled themſelve 
together, and made recourſe unto the King Croeſus 
Whereupon Atys ſo long perſwaded his father, tha 
he was ſent ; and his father conſented ſomuch the ra 
ther, becauſe the boar had no Iron about him, bu 
only teeth. But what followed? Behold, as one ra 
fierce and hot after boar to kill him (ſee the inevitable 
luck which always waited the ruin of this young 
' Prince) he turned upon him a ſword, which was di 
rected againſt the wild boar: So died he miſerably 
not able to ſhun the effect of his fathers dream. | £ 
/ King Aſtyages and Cyrus the fit of that name. L 
» A 12868 King of the Medes, grandfather by the f 
x mothers fide to Cyrus, had two dreams; the firſthhed, 
whereof was that the lady, his daughter, covered withſfcorc 
Her iflue all the Regions of Aſia : By reaſon whereof, | 
- he. would not marry her to any great perſonage o ) U 
that Country, left the Kingdom ſhould deſcend or } 
Tome to him or her; for he ſtood in doubt thereof inte 
But he gave her in marriage to a man of a mean eſtateſ die 
in the Country of Perſia, His ſecond dream was, 
that he ſaw proceed out of the loinsof his daughter, al C 
Vine, which by continual growth overſhadowed all © 
che parts of his Dominions : And therefore he com- af 
manded that Cyrus which was born of her, —_ be wi 
| * 8 thrown] ! 


: 
| 
| 
: 
; 


— — 


- ww 


$ 7 
1 


— 2 —w ——k— UP 96 ˙ —ꝝ—ꝝ- 
— 


? * * 
* A 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 149 
own out and expoſed to the wild beaſts, to let 


am foretold. 
Of - Amilcar, 


| Milcar, colonel” to the Carthaginians, when he 


nt at the next night he ſhould ſup in the ſame Town. 
To 
S. 
ha 


ra 


JU 


utiny in this camp between the Carthaginians and 
Sicilians : So that thoſe of the town making a 


amen ſally, took him Priſoner, aud made him per 


bleſce ſup in their town. So then much deceived of 
ng 3 which he conceived by his dream; he ſupped 
di- the ſame town as a Captive not as a captain, as he-. 
ly 0 _ accept pr * ſuppoſed. 


07 Alcibiades. 
e. 
the 
rſt 
ith 


ording to the appetite of Lyſandra. 
— 


Of ucen Margaret. 


or C King's eye was digged out : And accordingly a 
of inter of a ſpear ſtruck out his eye, of which wound 
ate died. 

- Of a Cintry-woman. 


wn G 3 | Kings 


A.” . 


m die. But be deceived bimſelf by his humane 
wnſel and wiſdom, ſuppoſing to hinder the felicity of 
6 little ſon, whom the Heavens preſerveds. as the 


— — - 0 - — wo — - 
" - * 27 
— — - 


| had beſieged Syracuſe, a Town of Sicily, in his 
am ſeemed to hear a voice, which ſaid unto him, 


joyful of tis good News, thought that God had 
miſed him victory, put his camp in arms, thinking 
give an aſſault and take the Town: But there fell 


\ Leibiades dreamed that he was Covered with his 
friends gown with which he dreamed he was co- 
d, he was after ſlain by the people of Farnabaſa, 


off) Ueen Margaret dreamed that Henry the French 6 


Country-woman dreamed that ſhe was delivered TER) 
of a Moon, which ſhined over all Britain. She 
s afterwards delivered of a daughter, was bought by: *: . 
| be wile of the Kings Herd- 8 nurſing then tle 


„ 1% ARTIMEDORUS. 


5 


a worthy King of England, whoſe fame, like the 


evidence and truth thereof, Two friends of Arcadia 


the treaſon of his hoſt; and if he would make haſte 
he might deliver him of great danger wherein he was 
Aſter which viſton he roſe, and ſet forward to go te 


him of his purpoſe, thinking it in vain to go ſo bl 


| keeper was executed by the ſentence of death. 


not forget the ſtory (but which is more ſtrange) founſ, 
his dreams verified. This it is, whilſt I lived at Praguq 
and one night had ſat up very late drinking at a fea 


o "TI 
% 


Kings ſon : And fo they growing both to elder years off 
the Kings Son married her, and had by her Ethelſtone, ry 
Moon, ſhined through Britain. - 
Of two Arcadians, 1 
FT Hough this dream enſuing be longer to repeat. 

than the former, it is worthy our memory for the. 


? 


travelling together, came to Megara ; the one of * 


them repaired to a houſe of his acquaintance, thqbm 
other lodged in a Lein. The firſt dreamed tha 


night that the other prayed him to help him againſlf n 


yhe 
night to ſuch a Tavern, So he returned td his bed 


this Inn: Afterwards by ill luck, he began to repen 


mis companion was wounded to death by his ho, aue 
and prayed him, that though he did not come to ſay 8 


bis life, yet he would revenge his death by all means] 
Telling him, that his body was m urthered by his hoff 1 
was at that inſtant carried right to the gate of th 1 


ton, ang there he found the cart which he had ſeeF A 
in his ſlgep: And after he had ſtayed it, he layed hie 
| band upon the collar of this Inn:keeper, , followe 


de 
the ſuit ; and the crime being conſeſſed, the In and 
an Engliſh Gentleman. 

1 Shall ſet down a relation given by an engliſh gent] 
man, of two dreams that he had, wherein he dif 


yet | 


deat 


early in the morning the Sunbeams glancing on, 
7 | 10 


* 


—— n 


eng by, told me, that my father was dead: At "7A 
o hich awaking, all in a ſweat, and affected with this 


ream, I roſe and wrote the day and hour, and all 
ircumſtances thereof in a book, which book, with 
nany other things, I put in a barrel, and ſent it from 
razue to Stode, thence to be conveyed into England, 


Wome months paſt. I liſt not to write _ lies, but 
What which I write, is as true as ſtrange: When Ire 


ot open the barrel I ſent from Prague, nor look into 


bad called my ſiſter and ſome friends to be witneſſes, 
here my ſelf and they were aſtoniſhed to ſee my 
vritten, dream anſwer the very day of my fathers 
eatb. I may lawfuly ſwear that which my kin{men 
dave heard witneſſed by my brother Henry whiltt he 
ied, that in my youth at Cambridge, I had the like 


hing with me, early in the morning I dreamed that 
ey mother paſſed by with a ſad countenance, and told 
une, that ſhe could not come to my commencement. 


We 


bridge. And when I related this dream to my bro- 
her, both of us awaking together in a ſweat, he pro- 
\d{<fted to me, that he had dreamed the very ſame : 


hers ſickneſs, neither in our youthful affections were 
Iny whit affected with the ſtrangeneſs of this dream; 
yet the next Carrier brought us word of our mothers 
death, , I am not over credulous of ſuch relations, but 
fac . 684 me 


u 


gu 


ea 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 151 | 
P. ' 4 * - 4 = | 
ice, as 1 lay in my bed, I dreamed, that a ſhaddow 


* 
18 
AF 


Jide now being at Nuremburgh, a Merchant of / 
oble Family, well acquainied with me and my 
Wiends, arrived there; who told me, my father died © 


rned into England, ſome few years after, I would 


he paper book, in which I had writen this dream, till 


Iream of my mother*s dedth, where my brother Henry 


being within five months to proceed maſter of Arts, 
and ſhe having promiſed at that time to come to Cam- 


And when we had not the leaſt knowledge of our mo- 


152: ART ITME.D-O RUS. 
methinks the circumſtance” of publiſhing at ſuch a 
time when there were thoſe living that might have 
diſproved it, if it had been falſe, it is a great argu- 
ment of the truth of it. LS 
D a Citiaen of London. 
J Pon the 16th of December at night, in the year 
1635. Being the ſixth night of my being in the 
, Country, I being 18 miles diſtant from London, and 
not hearing from thence touching the health or ſick- 
neſs of any fijend there, and being in a good lodging 
after a ſhort ſleep about eleven of the clock I awoke, 
and being much troubled and diſturbed at a dream l 
_ © dreamt, was not able to compoſe my ſelf to my reſt, 
but prefently told my dream to a faithful friend my 
bed-fellow, which was, that a ſpecial friend of ours 
at London was on his death- bed; and my fancy fug- 
_ geſted to me, that I ſaw_him laid forth, and covered 
for dead: But was anſwered by my bed-fellow, that 
t was but a dream, and nad no reality in it. IC. 
withſtanding continued my fear, and haſtened my 
journey to London, whither when I came, the firſt 
= news heard was, that my. friend was dead; and in- 
L -quiring the time when died, found that it was in 
T the very ſame night wherein I dreamt the aforeſaid 
dream of him; though when he left London he was 
in as good health, to outward appearance, as any 
man could be. Ys | 
Another Relation from the ſame Hand. 
bout 18 years ſince, I having fome of my family 
| 4 4 miles ſrom London, and one night ſleeping in 
bed very unquietly, I imagined, that I perfectly and 
| plainly ſaw a kinſwoman, a very ggod friend of mine, 
|. lying in extream torment, and pain, making great 
lamentation all that night; whereupon I roſe early in 
the morning, and ſent a ſervant 4 miles tò bring moon 
| w 


— 


* 


© os | wv I © fo 6 @o SY pun Uy | ww (& = 


how my neareſt relation, and her mother did; word 
was. brought, that they were all in good bealth, not- 
withſtanding Lwas extreamly unſatisfied in my mind, 
had continual fear that ſome or other of my kindred 
was afflicted with ſome extraordinary pain, and ac- 
cordingly it fell out ; for about one or two of the 


clock the next day came two horſemen in great haſte, 


making over to my dwelling in Farringdon without 
in London, and the firſt alighting from his horſe, I 
perceived him to be the brother to my kinman's wife; 
and inquiring of her health he told me, that ſhe was 
now in ſome travel, and had been fo near 48 hours, 
and could not be delivered; and he deſired (that with 


all poſſible ſpeed) we ſhould agree with doctor Cham- 


berlain, to afford the beſt aſſiſtance he could for the 


ſaving his ſiſters life, which gy was done; fo 


that within leſs than an hour the doctor was upon his 
journey with a coach and four horſes, but not reach- 
ing the Houſe till the night following, it pleaſed God, 


that juſt as he was alighting out of the coach, my 


kinſwoman gave up the gho 


Of a Woman deſirous to bring forth, | | 
A Certain woman very deſirous to bring forth a 
Child, dreamed in a night, that her womb was 


ſealed by the Gods; whereupon as one affrighted very 


ſore with this ſign, ſhe repaired to the Prophets for 
their opinions in the matter. Some held, that by 
the ſea), a ſecret let, impediment, and'bar in nature 
was implied; ſo that it-was not impoffible for her to 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 153 


: 
dn . £ 
. _ __— —— ——— —  — —  — — — -—- . 
— — £4 8 - 


7 


Conceive. But other doctors were of the mind, that 
ſhe had conceived, and was ſped already before tùhe 


dream ;. becauſe the manner is, not 'to make tore of 


1 
i? 
# 
Gs of. 
5 . £4 
4 , es 
* 
. T4 


x i 


1:4 ARTIME-DORUS. 


r . —˙·‚ 
9 


_ ' : e 
N 4 A wy — 4 * * - 


; Of Endemus a haniſhed man. 
A Certain man called Endemus, being warranted by 
> divers of the beſt Expoſitors of — during 
the time of his exile, that after five years he ſhould 
return home to his native ſoil with great honour, died 
at the five years end in Syracuſe ; being deceived in 
his expeRation of returning home to his own country. 
| Of Herod. 
A Fter Herod had unjuſtly made away his wife 
++ Mariamna, (whoſe title was much better to the 
regiment of Paleſſ ine than his) ſhe ſcemed every night 
to trouble and- wake him out of his ſleep, fo great is 
the fear and horrour of a bleeding concience. 
0a wicked Man guilty .of Murder. 
FT. Here was one who having been a wicked and ſu- 


© * 


dornate inſtrument, to bring an innocent, a no- 


ble, and a loving maſter to his end, repaired to a ſon 
of his, more then 20 years after for pardon of his fault, 


5 alledging that the father of that perſon, his old maſter 
pin 


and and tormented him by night in ſuch a 
wretched fort, as he could take no reſt or eaſe at any 


time; party beſought God to pardon him, ad- 


a Joynining only this advice in charity, that he would 


eek by counſel of ſome good learned Man, to lack 


the. Furnace of a guilty concience, which Yent up | 
_ theſe frights and fumes of-melancoly fancies to his 


head. 


ut this wicked caitif was bereft of his wits, 


.in which unfortunate and heavy plight he deceaſed, 


a Scythian, 


; | JT i reported by Pater? Siculus, that a Scythian | 


dreaming that Eſculapius, the great God of phy- 


fick, had drawn the noiſom humours of his bady to 
one certain place or head; was conſtrain'd within a 
"while lance a feſtered and moſt dangerous impoſthume 
of filthy matter: Not that the dreams were cauſes of 


the 


s ww wks wan RN WV 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 155 
the poiſon, which began to move and ftir within the 
reins, and would impare the parties health, if it were 
not prevented in good time with convenient order and 
advice of learning. 

W.' 4 two Men * one and the ſamt thing. 
T Men that ſhould contend in gaming at Olym- : 

pus, dreamed in one night that they were drawn 

4 ſwift courſers in a chariot, where upon they 

Mi repared to a prophet, of their acquaintance, for 
ſome light before hand what their luck ſhould be; 
the prophet craſtily conſidering. that it was impoſſible 
both theſe runners ſhould have good ſucceſs ; thought 
to make his profit of them both, by the'cunning of his 
own deviſe and ſly ſhift in anſwering, till proof might 
afford him ſo much credit by the gain of one, as : 
diſgrace by the dan age of the other. To the firſt 
therefore gave great encouragement and comfort. to 
hope, that he ſhould- prevail; becauſe (faith he) four 
horſes repreſenting in a figure) the team of Phoebus, 
could not but import aſſured Victory. The ſecond he 
diſ-ouraged with fear, becauſe albeit four horſes ran 
before, yet himſelf was laſt of all, which imporzed that 
he ſhould be caſt behind, and not get the wager. 

Of Dion and Brutus, Platonian Phile/sphers, 

He death of Dion and Brutus were ſhew-d unto 

them, by horrible v. ſions that appeared un: them, 

which they have told unto theit friends. ' here are 
many that cannot abide theſe opinions, and do main- 
tain that theſe fights and evil ſpirits do never appear to 
any man that hath right wits, but that they are either 
childrens fancies, or old womens ſables; but moſt 
certain it is, that v.ſions have appeared, and that ſome 
times but in dreams, by the atteſtation of theſe philo- 
ſophers, as well as by the interpretation of them by 
Artimedorus. 


1 . 
* * 


156 4RFIMEDORUS. 


vpon a pole that hung cloaths out of the gatret wine 


Of a woman with child. | 


Woman with child longing for a bakers ſhoulders 


X which carried her bread unto the oven, ſhe re- 
jected all other meat, and dreamt only of that; her 


. huſband deſiring to content her, wrought ſo with the 


ker, as for a certain fum of money, he was content 
xe ſhould taſte of that ſhoulder ſhe had fo much deſi- 


red; the baker endured her teeth twice, but ſhe had 
bitten him fo ſore, as he would not endure a third 
charge. The woman longing till, and often dream- 


ing of the bakers ſhoulders, at laſt fell in labour of 

ſons, 2 alive the tbird dead. 

ESA Of cardinal. Creſcence. | 

HE being at Verona and palling further about ſome 
- matters of importance, and writing very late at 

night, went to bed; after a while he dreamed, and 


-- 


- amagined that he ſaw a black dog of an exceeding great- 


neſs, having fiery eyes, and his ears hanging to the 
ground, which came directly towards him, and then 
hid himſelf under the table ; he was preſently awaked 
at this viſion, and was like one in a ſwound, but com- 
ing to himſelf, he cried out aloud, to his ſervants, to 


d ſeek the dog with a light, but not finding him, a 


feaver ſeized on him, and increaſed in ſuch ſort, as he 
died. Towards the end of his life, he cried often to 
his ſervants in his ſleep, drive away this dog which runs 
up to my bed. It was impoſlible to reſolve and com- 


fort him, but at laſt in great diſpair he died at 


erona. . 
Of a young man. 


E 'T Here was a young man, who dreaming in the 


night that he was to ride forth about ſome buſi- 


© neſs, roſe up out of his bed, being faſt aſleep, made 


himfelf ready, put om his boots and ſpurs, and getting 


dow, 


— 


WY {t& ko He 1, HY = 1" _ O©7 


s WY #8 C3 > 1oWA©H9IMH WU ke. © * kW. ry 03 


His Interpretation of Dreams, 1857 
dow, he fat aſtride on it, and began to ſpur with his 
heels, as if he he had been on horſe back ; but awa- 
king he was ſo terrified with this accident, as he was 
ready to run mad, which made him ſeek to the phyſici- 
cians for help. [$4.4 7 7525 
Of a Cholerick and guarrelſame man. 25 
Tlere was one, who being of a cholerick and 
quarrelſome diſpoſition, uſed commonly to 
dream that he was fighting with one or other ; and 
thereupon riſing out of his bed, ran to his weapon, 
drew out his ſword, and fencing with it after a ſtrange 
manner, ruck and foiled at the chamber walls, in ſo 
much that they were fain to take away every thing out 
of the chamber, that might not hurt himſelf or others. 


Of an artificer. 


There was an artificer that in his ſleep roſe out of 


his bed, and went up and down the ſtairs, and all 
about the houſe : Upon a time he went in his ſleep in 
the ſhop, unlocked the doors, went into the ftreets, 
where being awakened by ſome of his friends that met 
him, he being ſo aſhamed, that he never fell into the 
like dream again. . 


Of George de Schilinitz. 


G grave and unreprovable perſon, was wont with 
two of his brethren to walk many times in their ſleep, # 
whilſt they were ſtudents at Lipfick ; yea, to get up 
into garrets, and on the top of houſes, ſo that one f 
his brothers chanced to fall and break his thigh. At 
length their tutor looking narrowly unto them, whip» 
ped them welfavouredly, aſſoon as they got out of their 
bed, which having continued twice or thrice until ſuch 
time as they awaked, by that means they were-halped. 


_W 


de Schilintz, Councellor to divers princesa | 


258 ARTIMEDORUS. 
| Of three young gentlemen. 
T Here were three young gentlemen, brethren ly- 
Ning ia one chamber, one of them roſe up naked, 
found: aſleep, and carring his ſhirt in his hand, went 
to the window, where he caught hold of a cord baug- 
jag to a certain pully, and winding himſelf to the top 
of the hauſe met with a birds neſt, got out the young 
ones, wrapped them up in his ſhirt, let himfelf down 
again, re-entred the chamber, laid himſelf down in his 
| bed, and ſlept as before. Awaking inthe morning, 
| faith he to his brothers, what think you my dream 
was to night? methought I roſe out of my bed, went 
{ to the window, and got up to the top of the houſe, 
{ where] found a birds neſt. and brought away the 
| \ young ones. His brothers laughed at it, and after 
ſome talk, going to riſe he ſought up and down for his 
ſhirt, which at laſt he found with the young birds 
wrapped in it* they ran. preſently and looked up to 


the top of the houſe, and ſaw where the birds neſt had 
deen pulled out. 3 


Of a young Scholar. 

A Young ſcholar oi Blackenburgh did that ſleeping, 
which he could ſcarce do awake. As ſoon as Þz 

had ſupt, he would have fallen into ſo dead a ſleep, 
that hardly any noiſe could awake him, with pinching 
and pulling they had made him look up, yet carrying 
him to bed, he ſlept as before; and whatſoever be held 
ing ſo a ſleep, were it a table, a napkin, or any 
'garment, they were fain to have two or three men to [ſur 
open his fingers, and make him let go his holt, in ſo- hin 
much that many times holding his cloaths in his hands, 
they were forced to carry bim to bed, and let him ly Ihe 
with them till he awaked of himſelf the next morning. [wh 


of 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 159 
O the Duke of Holſtein's Cook. TS 

E riſing in his ſleep, went down out of his cam- 
ber, and having paſt through a great wide court, 
ntered into the kitchen, and got into the well, ſtrad- 
ing with his feet, and with his fingers clinging ſo | 
ard to the ſides of it, he deſcended with nothing but 1 
is ſhirt on till he came to the Water, which wetting 
the ſkirts of his ſhirt, it ſtruck ſo cold to his heels that 
e awaked, and began to cry out, o my legs help me. 

he folks of the houſe awaked with the cry, and F 
ſomewhat underſtanding the voice, ſought for him, |} 
nd finding him hanging in the well, they reached | 


; 
| : 
down a ladder, with a candel and lanthorn, but not 1 
ble to get him up that way, they let down a Bucket, b 
biding him put his right foot in it, and with his hands +} 
to hold faſt by the chain of the well, they carried him 
to bed, having loſt his ſpeech, and opening his eyes 
very ſeldom, at length he began to ſtir a little, and to 
. 


man Ys CHO Uo TY ww W TY = wW SS. TO WP ..Y 


mutter forth ſome words, but vomitting exceedingly, 
the next day he came to himſelf, and told tbem how . 
that night he dreamt that he was walking, and with 
ſtumbling had like to have fallen, and that he thought 
he had been over head and ears in water, | 

Of Tapia, a Spaniſh Gentleman. 
E was uſed to rife often in his ſleep, and do many 
things 'about the houſe ; and go from ove place 
to another without awaking but to the end no miſ- 
chance ſhould come unto him, he had always a baſon 
of water fet by his bedſide : Now one night in the 
ſummer time he roſe in His ſhirt, put a cloak about 
= {him got out of doors, being all this while faſt aſleep; 
„ land dreaming he was going to ſwim, and met (as 
y he thought) another man, who demanded of bim 
;- {| whither he went ſo late ? It is hot, ſaid Tapia, and I 
mean to go and waſh my ſelf, And ſo will I, quoth 

8 | the 


ow» = HoUY Uy w Ov W 


L to call that other, who was not to be ſeen: Where⸗ 
"upon fearing it was ſome evil ſpirit that had drawn 


us 5 which ſhe continued long, until | 
+ © beifng advertiſed thereof, watched ber ip the ſtreet 
| and whipt her well; to make her leave that guſtom, 


TT I” oe S — DT CC —ß 
| | 9 
. x — 
—_ 


4 * 
- 


ſſo, he got upon a bridge that was therevy and leaping 


> of Young maiden at Paris did every night uſually go 


* 


1 
88 
| * 


dis companions, roſe up in his fleep, and went and 
flew his enemy, lying in his bed in another chamber, 


gan to ſay, you cannot ſwim, I am ſure, Marry 


- much, do as I have done. Tapia follows him, and 


the other ; come let us Santos to gether, With all 
my heart, faith "Tapia, Thereupon they got them to 
the river, where Tapia putting off his cloak and ſhirt, Fai 
was going into the water; but the other jeſting, be- 


but I can, replyed Tapia, and it may be better than 
you. Well, (quoth the other) follow me, and ſaying 


down into one of the deepeſt places of the river, ſwam ff 
up and down, and called to Tapia, fince you brag fo 


leaps into the river: And all this was done in his fleep; 
ſo as ſoon as his feet touched the water he awaked, 
and labouring all that poſſibly be could, he Mee to 


bim into that danger, after he had recommended 
himſelf unto God, be ſwam over the river, took up 
bis cloak and ſhirt, and returned home, recounting | 


N 


that which had happened unto him. 
| a young Maiden in France. 

* to bath herſelf in the river, 9 a ſleep, the 

that her father 


whergat the maiden awaked, and was much aſhamed 
to fee herſelf naked in the ſtreet, - 4 

FO conclude with the example of a ſcholar, whahyas 
1 having had a quarrel the night before with one offong 


Ike 
: 


* 
um, 


and then.return'd to his own bed without awaking;hern 
@ it was ſuppoſed, for the next day the juſtice being 7 


His Interpretation of. Dreams. 161 
alled by the hoſt, found him a ſleep, and his dagger 
loody, confeſſiog that he had dreamt that he had 
ain him whom they ſaid was murthered. 2 
There ate many ſuch examples by the which we ti 
ay conclude, that beſides the natural and vita] | 
culties of the ſoul, (the which is affirmed to be very 14 
owerful in fleepers) theſe alſo that are dedicated and }| 
bject to our wills, do labour, cauſed by the means 
f the Muſcles; as to go, to embrace, to ſpeak, 
There have been many found, who riſing thus 
eeping, and goivg up into windows that have been 
pen have. fallen down to the ground, breaking their 
ms and legs ; others have been found ſtark dead, 
nd ſome ſo greviouſly wounded as they have been 
en. after giving up the ghoſt ; but it ſufficeth to 
wopound ſuch as have eſcaped (the which are ſet 
own in books” that we haye ſeen) untill that time 
up hay diſcover the reſt, by ſome man more diligent 
gh 27 cu; TEC 2ay note all if be pleaſe. 


J 


OI " . * bf 
At Celis A IEEE S374 Di EL ORG DG WEARS. i 


The Dream of Alexander. — 

70 0 Uin tus Curtius declareth in the life of Ale xar der, 
he that when he maintained his ſiege before the 
er Pity of Tyre, the ſuccouri of the Carthaginians he: 
ing entred. ; who ſaid they were deſcended | 

n, [Firians, concluded to raiſe his fiege, as deſpairing of 

ed ver ſurpriſing it. But in a dream a Satyr appeared to 
lim, after whom he followed as he fled before him iq 
> a chamber. His interpreters told him, that this... 5 
hafvas a certain forewarning to continue his ſiege for i 
offlonger days before the City, and that he ſhould ſurely 4 
dike it, which fell out accordingly, as was fore toll 
TyÞy a Prophet; who ſaid, That a Greek, ſhoul go- 
g⸗pern in that Country, F 
7 Ss 

ed | | | A 


FP! Amilcar at the ſiege of Syracuſe, dreamed that 


the town, as indeed he did; tho? not as a Prince, 


nothi g that is done in every part and quarter of the 


Again, becauſe the ſpirits are not clogged with this 
unwildly lump of fleſh, which not only taketh off our | 
edge of vit, and ſinketh vs more deep into the moſſy 
mould of earth, than is expedicnt for the ſharpnefs of | - 
our ſenſes, but ſtinteth us beſides to certain limits and 
degrees, in bringing great effects to paſs; we mult 


either Francis the poſt, or any other in the world, 


flowers, and flouriſhing plants, who whi'ſt ſhe 


= * B „ N es: l 1 | 
152 ARTIMEDORUS. 
A Dream of great hope altered to the quite contrary, 


the next night after he ſhould ſup withint 


which he believed, but as a Priſoner, which was fur- 
the? from his imaginations, 

That ſpi its give intelligence by ſleep or otherwiſe, 
A Nother means whereby the ſpirits are more able 

to 2ive warning touching things to come, is ſup- 
poſed to conſiſt in the quality of the place from 
whence they look ; for as the Centinel, who kept 
watch, <ſpied the poſt that haſted to the King, before 
all others ; fo there 1s no doubt, but (flickring aloft and 


world) the ſpizits may more eaſily divine, and give 
advertiſement by fleep, or otherwiſe, accordingly.” 


allot unto their ſhare, a far greater flight of agility and 
nimbleneſs, in removing haſtily from one coaſt to an- 
othef; and in bringing news with greater ſpeed, than 


„ 


T Here was one, that dreamed ſhe was walking in 
a greeniſh mead, all fragrant with beautiful 


wondred and ftood as amazed at the glory of the 


' Spring, an ancient Sir all withered and lean faced 


with oldneſs, the very emblem of death, made to- 
wards her with a green bough- in his hand, ſharping it 
at the end, who as ſhe fled away from his purſuit, 

8 Gy darted 


e 


* 99 — 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 163 
Jarted it often at her, the branch three times coming 
ery near her, yet did not touch her at all; ws 
hen he ſaw he could not prevail with his aim, 
vaniſhed away, and left the bough behind; and ſhe 
aſtoniſhed and affiighted with the dream - preſently, 
oke: Now mark Jhe ſequel of it; within three {| 
days after ſhe was for her recreation ſake walking in 
a green cloſure, hard by a pond ſide, and on a ſuld- 
f 


den her brain was ſo intoxicated and diſtgmpered, 
whither with a ſpice of the virtigo, or what amazing, 
diſeaſe ſoever I know not ; but ſhe was hurried into 
the deep, with her head forward, in great peril of 
drowning, and if ſhe had not caught faſt hold by |; 
chance of a hranch that hung over the water, the had 
been drowned. | 1 * 
T Here alſo are fatal dreams; as when we dream of 
eagles flying over our heads, it protends unfortu- 
. nateneſs, Io dream of marriages, dancing, and ban- 
que: ing, fore tei ſome of our kinsſolks ate departed. 
To dream of ſilver, ſorrow ; if thou haſt it given to 
thy ſelf : Of gold, good fortune. To loſe an axle- 
tooth, or an eye, the death of Tome ſpecial friend. 
To dream of ' bloody teeth, the death of the dreamer : 
To weep in ſleep, joy: To contemplate ones face in 
the water, and to ſee the dead, long life : To dream 
of chickens, and birds commoly ill luck. | 
D Reams are notable means of diſcovering our own 


\ - 
WT. 1 ere * 2 r 


y inclinations. . The wiie man learns to know, 
' | himſelf, as well by the nights black mantle, as the 
© | ſcorching beams of the day: in ſleep, we have the 
3 naked and natural thoughts of our ſouls: Outward 


objects interpoſe not, either to ſhuffle in occaſional 
cogi tations or hale out the included fancy. The mind 
is chen ſhut up in the burrough of the body. It was 
a cuſtom among the Indians, when their Kings went 
to 


— 


LIC... On % 
— „ — . M 
— — , —— —— nn, ace en 


164 ARTIMEDORUS. 
do their ſleep, to pray with piping acclamations, that 

"they mige have 900 2 and withal conſult 
well for their ſubjects benefit; as if the night had been 
atime wherein they might grow good and wiſe. And 
certainly the wiſe man is the wiſer for his ſleeping, 
if he can order well in. the day, what the eye-leſs 
night preſents him every dream is to be counted of;'” 
or yet are all to be caſt away with contem.pt I 
would neither be a ſtock, ſuperſtitious in all; nor yet ton 
an epicure, conſiderate of none. So that I doubt ace 
not but either to preſerve health; or amend the life. ¶ con 


- dreams may to a wiſe obſerver, be of ſpecial benefit; ¶ Ki, 


I would neither depend upon any, to incur a preju- | ſee; 
dice, not yet caſt away, in a prodigal negle& and Ica 
ſcorn. I find it of one that having been troubled with || wo 
the paining ſpleen ; that he dreamt, if he opened a + gr 
certain vein between two of his fingers he ſhould be | 
© Cufed, which he awaking did, and amended. But 
Indeed I would rather believe this, than to be drawn Ih 
to practice after it. a 
8 In Bakers Chronicle Fol, 
ONE Ann Waters, enticed by a lover of hers, 
nſented to have her huſband ſtrangled, and then 
buried bim ſecretly under a dunghill in the cow- houſe ;, | 
whereupon. the man being miſſing by his neighbours,” 
and the wife making thew of a wondring what was 
become of bim; it pleaſed God, that one of the In- 
- habitznts of the town, dreamed one night that his 
neighbour. Waters was ſtrangled. and buried under the 
dunghil in a cow-houſe ; and upon declaring his 
dream; ſearch being made by the Conſtable, the dead 
body was found as he had dreamed; and thereupon 
the wife was apprehended, and upon examination, 
confeſſing the fact, was burned : And now what hope 
can murderers have of being concealed, when they 
| | are 


are ſubject to be diſcovered by any mans dream. 
KIN G James the fifth of Scotland, was a great 


enemy to the light of the Goſpel, which in days. 


brake forth in that Kingdom vz. about the year, 
1541, and out of a blind and bloody zeal, was heard 


to ſay, that none of that fort ſhould expect any fa» 


©F'vour at his hands; nay, not his own ſons, if they 


proved guilty : but not long after, Sir James Ham- 


ton, being ſuſpected to incline that way, was falſly 
accuſed of a practice againſt the Kings life, and being 
condemned, Was executed; but not long after the 
King being at Linlithgow, on a night as he ſlept, it 
ſeemed ro him, that Thomas Scot, Juſtick Clerk 
came unto him with a company of devils, crying, 


| 


dor ſerving thee againſt- God, and againſt his ſervants, 
am now adjudged to Hell torments : Hereupon the 
King awaking, called for Lights, telling them what 
The had heard and ſeen. The next morning by da 
light, word was brought of Scot's death, which fell 
out juſt at the time when the King found himſelf ſo 
troubled, for Scot then died in great extremity, utter- 
ling theſe words, by the righteous judgment of God I 
P lam condemned; which being related to the King, 
made the dream more terrible. | . 
; | A N other viſion he had more terrible not many 
nights after: He thought he ſaw Sir James Hamil- 


ö 

fa ſword drawn in his hand, wherewith he cut his arms, 
; [threatning alſo to return within a ſhort time, and de- 
| {prive him of his life: With this awakened, news 
; {was brought him of the death of his two ſons, James 
fand Arthur; who died both at the very fame hour, 
> [Next year 1542. Being ovecome with grief he died 
ſin Faulkland, in the 32d, year of his age, 8 
; | op 


, Interpretation of Dreams. 165 


wojworth the day that ever I knew thee or thy ſervice; 


ton, whom he had cauſed to be executed, came with 


— 


" 16 ARTIMEDORUS. 


. _ ſhop Spotſwood's Hiſtory of the Church of Scotland 
A Young Man, whoſe mother lived near London 
travelling into Wales, in the year 1636. wher 
ſtaying all the ſummer, he dreamed the 20th. of Sept 
about midnight, that he ſaw his mother ſick in bed 
with the pangs of death upon her, and all his brothei 
and ſiſters weeping and lamenting about her: Whic 
affrighted him out of his ſleep. Yet conſidering it w 
but a dream, he pretty well pacified himſelf and aroſe 
but no ſooner came down ſtairs, but the maid aſk 
him how he did, he replied he was well; ſhe faid ſh 
was hartily glad to hear it, for the dreamed that night 
that he was deſtracted, and raved, and tore evei 
thing that came near him, and that ſhe had been ver 
much troubled far him all night. This dream (hap 
pening the ſame night) gave him fo freſh an occaſion} C, 
to reflect on his own, that he immediately ſet da 
in a book, the night, and hour he dreamed it, whic 
he well knew, by a clock in the houſe, that ſtruc 
one after he awaked, In November after coming t 
London, and going to his brother in Drury-Lane 
_- © the firſt news he heard was his mother was dead, B 
inquiring when ſhe died, he was aſſured by his brd J 
ther and ſiſter, that ſhe departed on Sunday the 20t 
- of September about midnight ; which compared wit 
the memorandum he had written, it appeared to b 
the very hour he had dreamed that dream, which 
can never forget. 


-- CONTENTS 


Zo * | NY 
4s; 644 , 


2 KMM MN NMI MMM MN 


K* 36. Key 112. | | 


CONTENTS, | 


ll 
Rts 39. Apparel 56. Air 62. Ants 101. Nen ö 
bley 114. - 
irth 14. Brows 23. Beard 26. Blood 29. 
Bebeaded 30. Breaſts 32. Back 27, Bathe 465. 
Beaſts 66 70. Birds 73. lig. Broks 8g. Beating | 
103. Bajon 107. Butchers 112. EINE. Sc. 113. 
114. 4 125. 
EDS. —_ Children 16. Check 25, Combatt 46. 
Clin 49. Combing 61. Chaje 66. Cor- 
1 72. Cleuas 88. Cock 88, 112, Carrying 92, 
Crocodile 103. Cat 103. Crutches 103. Cart 105. 
Chain 108. Comfort 108. You 112. Clook 1155 


Cc hariots 1 24. 


1 ugs 17. Drinks 47. Dogs 66. Dung 78. Dig- 
nities 82. Death "go. Dice 100. Dirt 106 


Debt, Sc. 108. Drunkard log. 
Ars 22. Enmett. 22. Eyes 23. Exerciſes 39. 
Earth 50. Earthquakes 88. Eggs 89. 
Forehead 21. Feet 37. Flowers 52. Fire 64. 
Fiſhing 70. Froggs 71. Fiſhes 72. Flies 75. 
Floods 79. Fountains 79. Fens 81. Flying 96. Fool 
199. Fortune 121. Flattery 124. 
Roin 36. Games 44. Garments 58. Gold 39. 
Graſshoppers 110. Getting 126. | 
Eead 18. 31. Hair 19. Hogs briſtles 20. * 
22. Hands 33. Heels 37. Hot-houſe 46. 
Herbs 48. Houſes-burning 55. Huſhandry 77. Hatred 
103. 4 
aws 26. Inſtrumentt 44. Images 107. - Lich. 110. 
1 Inn-keepers113. Iuſtruments 128. 


Lips 


10g. Prayers 111. Poverty 26. Parentage 1 30. 


90. » Swallows 96. Slaughter ' 103. Sickneſs 104 
- Statues 105. 114 Sings 107, Stones 113. Stuffs 12 


mf T* Beth 25. Thight 37. Tranſmutation 38, 7. 


. Towns 132, Trees 108, 


wn KN 20. Works 32. 41. Wreſtling 46 Watc| 
88. Weeping 93. Wedding 95. Worms 102. Walk 


CONTENTS. 
Tþs 26. Leg 37. Letters 42"tog. Looking-gla 
EX Laws 81. "oF der 88. Lies 102. n KN 


Embers 35. Morality 72. 39. Mountains 8 
Marſhes 81. Moon 85. Mill. ſtone 88. Mone 


— " Midwife 107, Mole 114. 
NN O 25. Neck 29. Novel 34. 22 


1 FFice 45. 


Lays and Paſtimes 43. Ponds 79. Path 81. P 
ficians 81. Patriages 89. Predecefſors 106. Plau 


Uails 101. 


Ibs 34. Riding 74. Race 45. Roots 48. Ring 
59. Rainbow $7. Rats 106. > 


\ Hawen'21. Shoulders 32. / Salutation 55. Sailing v 
Sun 84* Stars 86. Steps 88. Snares 89. Strip 


Selling 125. 
velling 42.188. Tree. 77. Theft 100. TOs 


*. 327 dreams 119. omitting 127. Veil 


55 Wells 79. Woods 31. War 23, Win! 


ing 103. Writing 106. eaſel 106. Wound 128 
Walls 124. . 
: * | 7 AG 
- : ro EAUT] 
2 td,” by << . 
: F 41 * . * * Se 


fone 


f 
| 
; 


