g 1 


W 


INTERPRETATION | 


DREAMS; 


2 | By n e can nee. 


bs 


1” 


RTIMEDORUS | 


First written in GRERK, and 8 ns 
into divers foreign aer, and now made i in- E= 
to ExoLiom. _ | 2, 


— w —5: 
bs * 


— 


EP | 


PL %. 
* 


3 2 1% 0 7 


ful and * for all fore of People, 


* 


4 A Treatise of great Value and Edleem, and very d 


oy - * 


ö | The » Twenty Fourth EDITION. | 
[2 SY LONDON: 1 


| Printed for 8. inde aid Co. 2 Hick, L. W 
N in Patermfter-Row, and 0 * Ware and _ CY 
OO ack 


1 
1 


* — 


22525 25555 — 


„% & 


* — — 


Was: oi ns 


Ome are of opinion, that, dreams, which arise of 
natural and carnal affection, are likewise so to 
Ie interpreted; as an usurer to dream of gold, or any 


Heir natures are prone and subject unto, But our 
Luthor, Antimedorus, doth not agree with them in 
their opinion; but faith, dreams of any importance, 


effect, and the experience of them: and contrawise, 
the affirmeth that those dreams, which are shapen to 
Pur affections and thoughts, are, to speak ingeniously 
Fs. much as nothing, and we must take no heed of 

hem. And surely Fla confident, that an ordinary 

Dre-master, an avaritious extortioner, an envious 
derson, or an ambitious man, a flatterer, or dissem- 


tendeth to the honour or profit either of himself, his 
friends, or of the common wealth. But it often- 

i imes cometh to pass, that an honeft, pute, chaste, 
and vertuqus man (because he is exempt from human 
raility) I think may and shall often see, and inter- 
ret dreams and visions, to the safety, honour, and 

| Profit of himself, his friends and commonwealth ; for- 

| Wsmuch as his spirit is less apt to be bound, tied, and 
oiled with the fellowship of the b:dy. In the Holy 
cripture, we have experience both in the Old and 
t 


4 
. 


whereby he sbeweth, 2 it was no new thing if God 
An l 21 2 »* > By 


wa.” & 


Wo \ 


70 te READER, - 


other carnal men, when they dream of such things as 


for which come of God, are far different, from their 


bler, or a common or notorious drunkard do not. 
ommonly fee any good dreams, or any dream that 


New Teftament . Foseph the fon of Jacob and Foseph 
he husband of the Virgin Mary, St. Peter in the fe- 
ond of the Ads, repeateth the prophecy of J; 


ew 


4% ene 


— 


* 


4 


LY 


FE; * 4 Ty 
sent visions and * There. are other places 


= 


- TY = * 3 
2 


| the Holy Scriptures which I shall forbear here to inserf 


sufficient to prove the antiquity of them. . 
Touching hiftories,. you may see much of the ii 


and experience of dreams: /7-giPs mother, when i 
was with child of him, dreamed that she saw a bran 


of laurel growing, and she brought forth a poet, 


whom was given a laurel crown. Also Hecubi 


queen of Trey, when she was with child of Pari 


dreamed that she should bring foi ch a firebrand, thi 


should at once consume the whole country, and 


terwards it proved true: for the said Paris, of whol 
. she was deliver'd, was the cause of the ruin, burninl 
and destruction of Trey; which was interpreted bf 


his sister Cassandra, to whom they gave no credits 
whereupon the mischief seized not only upon t! 


king and queen, father and mother to the said Pari 
but also upon the whole kingdom, whose miserads 


destruction is recorded to this day. Sacrates dream 
that he saw alittle Swan in his lap, whose feathers greif 
and presently spreading its wings, and flying on high 


fang a sweet and harmonious song ; and the day 


% a 


when his daughter was with child, tha 
. - arise from the nature of a vine growing so fast, thilf 


alledg 
> losopher expounded, and according to which el 
tion it fell out. Also, Cicero, Hannibal Ca. 


and many others, which had dreams and Visions! * 


' 


lowing, Plato came to him to be his scholar, who b 5 


bis eloquence sang sweetly. King A/tzage, dreamed 


the boughs thereof should over shade the regions d 


| his dominions, which afterwards fell out accordingly 
for she bare Cyrus the great, king of Persia, who wil 


mafter and lord of all those countries. I might besidYy 
e Philip of Macedon father to Alexander the phi 


'nigt 


there shoul 


4 


- = ae _ * W , þ * — 
ix * "AS 
* * _ 9 
* » p 


inserf tht, whose effects came to pass, as great and divers 
Mories do verify. But for brevities fake, I shall * 


= 


ie isfi bear to inftance any more particulars, left I should 
en send my reader, with presuming too much upon his 
bran{tience. Less I should have said, but was loath to 


et, Muve the curious unsatiched. . 120062 
lecubi And to conclude, it seemeth to me great arrogancy 
Pari any man, to fay all visions and dreams are vain and 
„ thi none effect; which hath already been proved false, 
nd a many histories both divine. and human: and, I 
whoWink, it were to dispute against God, and wrong to 
urninffse sou] of man, which is, indeed, the mirrour of 
ted bMeavenly things, in making it always in all things un- 
:reditfofitable, a vagabond, vain, and idle, seeing that 
When the body resteth the foul seemeth most to'reign 


- 


On tl | 

Pari d rule in her force and virtue, and in her spiritual, 
serab@prehensible, and intellectual nobility. Wherefore 
reames will agree in opinion with Socrates, who faith, that 
s greian, whether he live or die, is in the hand of God, 
| highho takern all his affairs in his hand, and in care dis- 


ay t 


dseth them at his pleasure, and forewarns nim bx 
yvho bl 


any secret and hidden ways, as it pleaseth him. 
Reader, I intreat thee to take notice that the three 
books were written long after the two first ; as ap- 
harcth. He seeing that in the two former there 
Wanted some things which the diligent and curious 
Rader might defire, collected and gathered togetber - 
pe things contained in his three last books : which he 
Fould not add to the two former for the reason which 
ie phil giveth in the end of the second; por yet would 
xposits blish them by themselves, but rather gives them the 
urnidl le, because they so depend upon the "two former, 
ons bat in some speeches they may seem to be repeated a- 
nigh VE 0-4 | gain 


| 


— 


9 
7 - 
* —— * — ne 4 1 
pr ET —— ã U— —— — — — . — ER — ko. 
” 
= 
- 
9 . 
„ , * 
% 
* 


— — —— — 
r 9“ ——̃ —-—— —r̃ — 


— — 


— 
- ”— 
1 
- 
* 


_ = — 2 N 


('6 ) 


"rok or diverkty of fre» Th t 

I doubt nt but some men, at the first debe, when 
they read this book, willthink it a vain and frivoloui 
thing; for I, before 1 had considered. the book. p 
thought as much : but after that By long time and con- 
tinuance, I had compared "these things with experience, 
as well in my self as others, I could not but reverence} 
and admire both the works and the author. And 18 
um of opinion, that there is no judicious reader, but 
will yield unto this truth, and therefore I shall forbearf 
to bring any further proofs, but commit thee to the 
perusal of chat which followeth : And rest, I i 


— Th lu Fried. | 
| : R WOOD. 


* 


r Th | cel 


* 


1 IMEDORU 8. 


HE time and place of the birth * a 


Ence,: 

rence  medorus, is as . uncertain as his memory 
\nd | is famous, The authors who have made 
„ but mention of him, do differ as much in the 
be at lation of the former, as they do all agree in W 


Pur of the latter. a 

We shall find that several countries and cities; 2 

s sometimes: for the nativity of Homer, did en- 

$-avour to add unto their glories, by a noble claim _ 

hey made to have an interest in him, by flattering 

pfterity and themselves, that he received his origi 

mal from them. 

Perganum in Asia, doth register him to be born 

Pere, and from thence the wan and he was alled* 

Artimedorus Petgamenus. 

The isle of Sicily is as ambitious to acknowledge 

Him to be hers, and thereupon the gives him the title 

„ Artimedotus Etnensis; we de shall And nd in Cluverius,- 

The other authors, that in the year of the world 37 30, 

| Which was 273 years before the incarnation of our 

Saviour, that Artimedorus was governour of the city 

pf Sytacusia in Sicily; with Hiero ; and that he was 

' Kimous « 0-09-40 497 was, pd secrets of nature, ny; 
ie study of philosophy. & 

Ccelus Rhodoginus being willing to take advan- 

pee from the meer credit of bis antiquity, will - v 

Fl] you, that he studied those parts of heb y 

nich were written by Hermes Trismegistus, and 

ꝙ92a 4 was 


g 


| 
' f 


a — — — 
wy 


_ wroksw'a wp Hy fir 
; the n ties Egyptians. | 


'frmeth, 


— — - — 
— — R 
4 . o * vx My : 
. N - * - , 
* 1 = 


; LIFE " pt a 
was exact in those obseryations of geography, and those | 
pieces of the mathematics, whichiwere sai be left 
unto Fosderity by ae Anaxamander.. 


Diodorus the 


maketh mention, that he 
_ beginning of Meng and that 
he ascribed the honour of n in Os not to 


12 * 


8 olfipineuting be 11 compile A book | 
of laws and customs, in all which, for the honouf of 


antiquity, be sheweth how much reverence, customs 


and laws have gained from the only merit of their 
continuance; and as a custom by meer continuance 


doth wear itself into a law so the more aged any 


la is grown, the less obnoxious it is to be reserved, | 


or repealed, and every true thing being the true 


which was the first, and that being the first, whitu 


was from the beginning ; by how much more old and 


more stricken in years any law is, by-fo much it is the 


letz subject to faultier, ot to grow dectepid ; and this 


js che reason which as he alledgeth doth confiim the 


ate of any law in its integrity, because the longer it 
endureth, the more, be 2 4 


feftion, that is, to a. condition to grow never null, ory 
eee N 2th 911 3608 t 4 760 


He wrote also a 2 25 3 in the treaty © 


/ whereof although be was a heathen, and ignorant 
of, divine truths, yet he seemeth to come more near 


unto it than Plato, who had the honour among the ' 


iN gentle to de stiled the divine philosopher, for Plato af- 
| that man at the first was, by interpreta- 
. Gong Man Ames vhs ide in that one budy'Yie 3 


” 
* rn bad 
" » » * - td 
i*þ * * [ * * C 


; 


£ 6 a 8 e 


2 is z” 3 


= 
2 
i 


'; 


ith, it inclineth to its per- 


3X 


* 1 
T- * 


P 
ll  ARFIMEDORUS. 9 
those | ad. the faculty, without the belp of any second 
: left 0 * generate another like unto himfelt; which 
fterwards, as he faith, altered. But Artimede- 
s speaking of marriage, and the political ends 
d he hereof, to distinguish private intetests from pub- 
that ick and common, and things facred from pro- 
ot to Pane, doth imply that marriage is as old 


” 
* 


+ Wature and that there was no fooner one, but 
„ Frise nature did divide him into two, and then 
2 hey were no sooner "we but ws Fg strait 
ot united into one agaig. It is recorded by my, aur 
toms wag that this iu did leave bebind him 
Meir many books, which by their jury of tinie, arg 
ance qgerived to posterity only in Fragments, in 


au imperfect pieces, as are the writing of Pephe; | 
ved, Sr, and of Linus, whose. father is faid te bg 


WS, 2 


lb. a 868 12 
PN "of Kune > lep Sen, "hack 
in the isle of Gridu; where, with fingular ape, 
de plause, be was professor of the Greek ase a 
| this what time the civil wars betwixt Julias Cæsar 
»tbe and Pompey the great, had divided the whole 
er it world into two Parishes: the one adhereing unto . 
per- FCzsar, and the other to the fortunes. of Lee 
I, or But the sword having laid all things low, 
the thunder of the wars draining the harmony 
of the arts, Irtimedorus addrefled himself to 
eaty 1 Rome, where, thaugh it was in the DIO of tu- 
rent mult and disorder, yet the Gown did still grant 
near both reyerence and protection unto learning, 
; the Here, with as much safety as advantage, he did, 
© af- put again into practice his profession of the Greet 
reta- 7 tongue; and Po much, abcut the fame time! 
be being stayed in Agyp!, 4rtimederus became one of 
bad tbe. confidents of r and Cassius, who Hes 

ST ns N | em- 


0 


g 
; 


al”. 


-4 , N 

by - 8 3 
F = - * * 6 5 . 4 
- 


_ | „ A AA <5. 1 
10 Ai 
themselves the. defenders of the Roman liberty: 
here, by this great inspection into Phylfophy, and 
the course and circumstances of the affairs in the 
world, he wisely discovered the great revolution 
approaching, and saw Brutus's Malus Genius at 
Rome, before himself had seen it at the fields 
of Philippi, under the pretence of melancholy, Þ 
contracted by too much fludy, he dissembled 
with Brutus, and removing as well his person as 
affection, from his interest, and himself; he 
1 - drew up an information to be presented unto | 
Czsar, containing the handling of the plot, in the 
whole. course of - the conspiracy, against . himself, 
At the same time the wife of Cæsar, who, as she ? 
. was much honoured with the Trophies of her 
husbands Victories, so she was no less troubled 3 
at the capticiousness of his incontinency, as 
may appear by the unrebuked petulance of his 
own soldies, in the day of his greatest glory, 
when he did ride in triumph to the Capitol. 


- 


Romani servate uxores mœchum calvum adducimus. 4 


Look to your wives, you romans, for we do 


* Bring a bald pated leacher unto you. 


Feet _ preferring her duty on that morning he 
died, above her passion, she informed. her hus- 
band of the fad dream which on the night be- 
fore aflifted her, and which had still left a great 
impression upon her spirits; and - did beseech 
" him for that day to forbear to go to the Senate house. - 
There was at that time no man in Rome more 
famous for the interpretation of dreams 2 
2 Wu, Arti- 


- 
* — — — - 
— —ͤ 
* 


—_ —_ 


o — — — 
Derg — — — — 
= 


—__ "— — 
= 


* * 


y ARTIMEDORUS. It: 
Artimedotus, who - understanding of it, and the 
Jule reputation that Cæsar gave unto the 


the Wream, be resolved with bimself to put the 
ution Miscovery of the treason into Cæsar's own 
is at and, and to beseech him to vouchsafe a present 
fields Perusal of it, without the delivering, the paper 
holy, e his manners was, into the hands of his Secre- 
abled ary, or the master of requests. Cæsar began 
n as Ince or twice to cast his eye upon the paper, and 


e rather oecause it came from the hand of Ar- 
s, whose merit be did intend by his 
zounty to oblige unto him; but so great, was, 


| 


'TICLIT 


aself, he multitude that followed him, either to con- 
s he ratulate his fortune or to admire his ambiti- 
" her dn, that they almost hurried him into the Senate- 


bled house, to the prepared Daggers of Brutus and \ 
as Cassius. I do the rather make mention of this in. 
bis his place, to present unta you, that when the 
ory, sands of our days are numbered in the Glass of 
time neither the preconition of a dream by 
_ KF. most tender wis-; nor the interpretation of 
Us, zndustry of men, shall be able either to add or 
etract, or make the least alteration in the de- 


Frees of providence. . 33 


* 


If you will wipe eff the dust of antiquity 


i om the History of the Lydians, you shall read 


he of Artimedorus, who being famious for philoso- 
hus- phy, floarished in the City of Daldis, and did 
be- write a book of the interpretation of dreams; 
reat be was esteemed as one of the wisest men 
ech in those days, as Stephanus reporteth, and it 
se. seems that either by a confidence in himself, or 


ore by the perswasion of his friends, he did believe | 
han zumself to be fo; for in the latter end of one of 
rti- 08 LO his 


- 


2 bt nN A * 


. his bocks Gf the interpretation of dreams, he de- 
fireth that nothing may be added to it, He wrote 
also a book of chitomancy, and another of augury, 
thatis, of reading of fortunes by looking oy hand, 
and passages by birds, By their Bring Ga rae tie | 
hard and on your left or by hopping on 
before you. 

þ "We. are yedparing these also for the mtelsy to te | 
performance whereof we shall be so much the more 
encouraged, as we shall find, that this book of inter- 

F — 7 of ben doth r meet bu ber e 


l : 
i 29 
* 
yy 
w_ / 
{ * 0 
N * 5 
g 
N ART 1 
* - 4 
10 
Jo's 
WL »> Af 
O89 
* 4 - 
"Ns 
i 
14 
il 
| 
| * 
i " 
j 8 
11 1 1 


His Exposiion 67 - 2 A 


D * E A N 8 


"The First BO. _ 


= 


' 6 V "Prams eitber solely Speculative, or Mlegoris « 
| a 1 cally Stgnificative. 62%, | 
R EAM S are either speculative; and. 1 
" 1 agreeable to their vision, as When 3. 
2 man dreams that the ship wheres. - 
in be is doth perish; and rising, finds it trug 
and saves. himself, with some few, besides: or 
Alle gorical, by ene thir g signifying another 
| Fwhcreby. our Souls doth raturally advise us 
that under them there is {i mewhat abstruce, 
T T. secret, or hid. Fast therefore I will set down 
the definition of a dream in general, against 
vhich to object, were to love contention. A 
dream therefore is a motion of fiftion of the 
Soul in a diverse form, signisying cicher good 
15 1 OF evil to come. Of dreams, such as belong 4 
not to others, being only for or against those 
which sce them, as tu speak, to sing, to dance, 


* 
4» . = 
b 8 


to fight, or to syim. But things which are about 


the body; or outward things, as beds, chests, 

1 aud cloathing, Sc Although hs 
be improper and Paruicylag 4 yet, it falls out 
e 


— 


un ARTIHEDORUS. | 


” cording to the neceflity and propricty of the | 


friend, the daughter and the sister. Morcover, 
all those which are done by us, and in us, 


appertain to us particularly yz and on the con- 


and the dreams Ggnific good, the joy shatil || 
come to us, and it contrary, then the con- 
- trafy : but it they b. our enemies, we ought 


— 
1 


4 Ry * 1 „ * 1 . 
WT; 
I ® * 1 » . 2 - 1 


that often they come to our neighbours ac- if 
ulage. And in such sort the head signifies the 


father, the right hand che mother, the son, 
and the brother ; the I-ft hand the wife, the 


and towards us only; we mult think that they 
trary, all such as are not donc by us, nor to- 


wards us, nor in us, shajl happen to others; 
and yct notwithstanding, jf they be our friends, 


to think and judge accordingly. f 
; Of the Birth. -q 


I F any one dr.ams that he comes out of a2 


womans belly, as to be born 1:to the F 


world, he must judge in this sort. This 
dream is good for him that is poor, for he 


shail have means or friends which will main- | 


"tain him; or if he be not a tradesman, and of 


an art which requires the work of the 
hand, for this dream forewarns him that 
he should be withour work, as children | 


which have their hands bound together : | 
To him which is rich, this dream fignifieth | 
that he shall have no rule in the house, | 


but | 


t rs shall overrule him ala his will * 
the br chi dten are governed by others. * To 
the Him whose wife is not with child, it signi- 

fon, eth that he shall lose his wife; for children 


the te not married, nor eome at woman: but 
ver, o him whose wife is with child, it signifieth 
us, at he shall have a son in all things; ue? him- 
hey if; and he shall be fo like him, as if him- 


ef were born twice. To champions and 
| Fombaran:s this dream is ill; for children 
tan neither go nor run, and Cannot. assall 
Iny man. To him which is in the count 

Fhat he shall return home, as if he should 10. 
urn to his beginning. To a sick man it sig· 
Pißieth death, because the dead are wrapped in 
| on cloaths, as children, and laid in the 
Proun 


To be big with Child 


＋ any being poor, dream that he is gree 
with child: he shall become rich, and shall © 
geatner a great deal of money: If he be rich) - 
he shall be in pain and care. He'which hath | 
wife, shall lose her, having no more need 
That she shall bear children. He which hath 


4 


— 
4 


ic signißeth sickness; but to be big with⸗ 
| child. and then to be delivered, is all one; 
for it means that the sick person shall die 


debied, : 


no wife, - shall have a gentle one. To others 4 | 


Bquickty. . But to him that is poor, and in- l 


7 * . 


9 


"i ALEEIMS Piet. 


' (debted, enduring pain and misery, it is aun end 
r ot all his present evils , 5 
il pages! revealeth secrets This drca 

cos to rich usurets, factors, and alx such t 

FE - in authoriiy; for that which they had be. 

fore they shall lose. But to merchants and fai. 

Ex ty to them WH e ships, this dream 
* To many after this 9 hath 
Þ 4 hap: e parens. 


| bike To Bare Children. 2 
O- FREY that you see or have children 
of your own, and not of other mens, iz 
ill to man and wife: for it foretells care and 
keaviness for, necessstries, without the which 
children cannot be _hourifhed, But the male 
children bring good success ; daughters bring 
an end worse than the beghnaing; for they 
are married wich a dowry, I know a man 
Which dreamed he had a daughter born, and 
borrowed money upon interest. And the con- 
fide, I knew another which dreamed that 
12 + a Seen] his daughter deceased, and it fell 
dot, that he was constrained to pay a debt 
for which he was bound. So then his daugh- 
ter made an agreement with the debt. But to 
te Other mens children is good, when they 
are fait and well fa youred, for this sigaikerh 


* daun ESE and MIB) tim: it àt hand. of 


PP o 


2 - 


1 of 1 Divan. uy 
Children 1 in Cloaths, and Linnen 3 
F an "one. frm to 2g himscif wrappe 
in cloaths in fasbion of little children, a 
suck some-womaps-dugs which he knoweth, -- © 


BK: argueth. Jong sickness if he hath, not his 
ife with child, for then he should; have a son; A 


drn like himself. And if his wife hath such 
dream, she shill have a daughter. But if 
one being in prison hath such a dream, the® 3 
evil shall stir op such accusations. against 
im, that he shall — be delivered 3 and it 1 
is hot without reason, to judge the like in siek, 
As: But to. see in a dream to have milk in 
er dugs, to a young woman it signifieth sne 
Al conceive, and her fruit-shall: come to per- 
Qtion' z: to an old woman being poor it signi- 
. riches, being rich in expence and ꝗiberali- 
to a maid, that her marriage is near, for 
wat the company of a man the can have 
0 milk; but if she be a pretty maid, and 
ath been long unmarried, it fignifieth her 
death s for all things coming beyond the ac- 
aftomed age are evil, some few. excepted. 
. 9 a poor man it is abundarice of money and 
dossessions, if he can nourish others. More- 
over, I have known by experience, that this 
dream to one. that was not married, soreteld a 
Wie; and to- one that had uo childred, it 
Of forctold children. But 0 a 2 an = 


138 48TIMEDORUS. | 

an artificer, and all such as in their estate travel Z 
and move the body, it signifies sickness, Al- 
so I knew one having wife and children, who 
| had this dream, lost his wife by death, and al- 
ways after himself nourished his children, ex- 


ercising towards them the duty of father and 4 
veer together, N 


eiii LY 


" Of obey: Head. 


* To dream you have à great head is good 
** "to a rich man which hath not as yet any 
great estate and' dignity 3 also ro a poor man, 
to a champion, te an usurer, to a horse- | 
{- courser, to him that puts out money to use. 
| For first, this dream foretells principality or 
7 dignity, in which he must wear a crown, scep- | 
ter, or diadem. 24h, Great riches and pos- 
sessions. To a champion victory: To a broker, 
an usurer, great heaps and sums of money: 
But to those who are already in dignity, and | 
to an orator and judge of the pebple, this 
dream brings charges and re a apr" by the 
KN. — 8 and to him that is sick, it is headach : 
ol a soldier it signifieth travel and pain: 
to a scrvant long servitude, and to him which 
hath chosen a calm life, pain and anger. But 
to have the head lesser than natural proportion 
i! Fgnifieth a thing contrary to the. fignification 
* the head above spoken of; importing diffe- 
rences in respect of * different quality of the 


man. of 


Fd 


— y - 


His Interpretation of Dene, > 19 
of long Hair. | 


75 you * you have fair long hair and 
seem to take pride therein, it signifieth 
00d, especially to a woman; as also to a wise 

Fan, a bishop, a southsayer, a king, and a 

Prince: for to such as use to let their hair 

row, this dream is good, because their pro- 

(sions permits them to keep their tresses. It 

2 good for others but not, to one self; and it sig- 


. ifcth to them only riches, and those painful 
wrse.. Not pleasant, for one must stay time, and in 
ase, | pat time it may be ney: pain before long hair 
or vill come. | 
. 5 07 Hair i in ill Order. WT. 
ker, | 1 Ong hair, but out of order, and as it were 
ey: rather hard and rough hair of ones beard, 
and pr head being in tresses, betokeneth to all per- 

this Wons anger and heaviness: and J once saw a 
che {worthy gentleman placed in authority, and 
ch: Happy. also in all his other affairs, who in a 


in: dream seemed to see those which were under 
Shim, go before him, and also that they had 
But I hair all cut rude and out of order, whereupon 
ion I told him that it significd heaviness unto him. 
ion And presently after he was discharged of his 
ffe. office and authority, which (you may well 
the think) was grievous unto him. 


2 of 


29. ARTIMEDORUS. 


E rfommonly sudjcet to. Tp have horse hai, 


9 have 'wool instead of hairs, foretells 


Also, if having thin wool on his head he shall} 
think that it is natural unto him, if the hairs? 


most think 'accordingly ; that is according to 
the thing whereunto we think them WP) 


betokeneth sudden shame, hinderance of pre | 


| head' inzthat sort, is poverty, and ill luck ii 
old age: It any one hath the right side of biel 
head shaved and naked, he shall lose all his 
male kindred ; and if he hath none, he shall 
| sustain. hurt. If contrariwise the left fide of 
bis head be without hair, it is loss of cousins, 


— _ — 


07 Hogs bristles, and Horse hair. 


0 dream, that you have hogs-bristles i $1 
great and violent dangers, such as the hog] 


ey ene! of servitude and misery. . 
Jo bave 2 inflead of Hairs. 


long ficknefs, and fantasies, and the itch. 


seem to be changed into any other thing, we 


To seem to be without hair- about the face, 


sent affairs: but to see the hinder part of the 


and allies, for the head signiheth the kin- 


dred, the right fide the male, the left the fe- 


mals, and 10 through all the body. To have 
all the hindcr parts of the head naked, is 
for him Which goes to law, for him 
hat. is. fearful, for him that is shut up and 


| | SES detained 


Hi Itefprotation , \Dreams. I 


Jerained by force, he/shall fly and cap 8 '4 
dark ing that one canner carelvhitn by the har 
Wing 8 N K 4: g % 3 
7 fee Bin olf poll or re Way 2 

TT OR to (ce himself polled on the head, is 
51 good for jesters that use to make men 
augh, and to such as are commonly sfia d en: 
ro all others it is evil, for it betokeneth as 
5 och nakedness and barrennels, if it bring 
. Woot greater evils, and more at hand. To 
Wnavigators it is evident shipwreck. To sick 
rs per sons great peril, and yet not death; for 


fickness, shave themselves, but not the dead, 
To be polled by the barber, is good to all 
ia general; for surely no man, being in any: 
e | eee estate, will poll themsclves, see- ? 
N those only regard such outward- orna- 
22 the head, which are without sorrow, 
or want: I therefore: add by the hands of a 
© barber, because if any man shaves himself, it 
1 betokeneth sudden heaviness, or very ill luck. 
Moreover, to be scratched with nails, to him 
chat is in debt, it betokens that he shall acquit 
$ himself ;-to otners, it foretells bars by them 
that scratch them. | 7 i 
Of the Mounbasd e. . oP 
T7 Forehead sound and fleshy, is: . * 
to all, and — liberty of speech, 
=_ "gt, 


* such as escape a shipwreck, or recover after 


» strength, and constancy. But to dream tha 
ou have a forechead of Brassy iron, or stc 
to all bakers, vintners, and such as live by 


TMEDORUS. 


- shameless gain, is good, and to those only: fo 
to others i it breeds hate. | 


07 the Ears. + 
| Fon to have many ears, is good to hin; 
that would have any one obedient to hi 
is wife, children, servants. To the rich it sig ; 
nifies great renown of his good, if the ears bg 
fair and well shapen ; but to his ill, if the ear: 
+ be U]-favoured,. or deformed. This dream i 
ill to a servant, as also to him which hath : 
suit in law, be he the plaintiff or defendant 
but it is good to arr artifice, or. to one tha 
worketh A #1 his hands, for” he shall have 
many that will imploy him. To lose the cars? 
betokeneth the contrary to all that is aforesaid 
To clean ones ears, is good news which shal 
come to us on some fide : contrariwise, the ears 
. beaten and chafed, do foretell ill news. 


© Off Emmets going into the Ears. 
Tc 2 dream of emmets getting into the ea 
| good only to sophisters, philosophers, 
and hool-masters : for the emmets represent 
children, which will give audience to sophisters 
; To others it foretells death: for they ard 
daughters of the earth, and go again: to thesh 
earth. 1 know one which dreamed his twosfo 
„ ears 


= 


© His Interpretation of Dreams. 23 
ars were filled with ears of corn, and how the 
ern fell into his hands, and he heard news 
What his brothers heir was dead, his heir, by 
eason of the ears of the corn; and his bro- 
hers heir, because the ears represented brothers 
d sisters. To dream you have asscs ears, is 
Food only for philosophers, to others it is ser- 
itude and misery, To have the ears of a 
Ton, or wolf, or any other crue] beast, is 
Wnares and deceit by envy :; moreover, to dream 
What you have eyes for ears, signifieth blindness © 
r deafness, PH. er | 
Of the Brows. 


HE brows hair, and of a good grace, are 

good to all, especially to women : but the 
brows naked and without hair, signifieth to 
I ill success of business, single combate, and 


grief. | — | 
=, Of the Eves. 2 
O have à sharp sight, is good generally: 


| Fnoney, impeachment of affairs. To him that 
.rsMhath children, it forctells, they shall be sick.” 
ers To be blind of both eyes, is loss of children, 
entÞrethren, father and mother: notwithstanding ' 
ers This dream is good for him which is in prison, 
are and to him which is very poor ; for the first 
theshall no more see his evils about him, the se- 
wosftond shall have wherewith- to aid and * -4 


ars 


but a troubled look signifieth want of“!“ 


BP” 24 r 


sure bimself, as many are ready to 
their helping hand to be blind, But . 
dream bier such as ate making bag ve ve 
Auges: as also it forewarns him that is in 
strange country, that he returns not he 
for 'he that hath loft! his fight can neither | 
in a strange country, nor find his'own- hou 
Also this dream is bad sor a soldier, and 
so to all: the dealing trades; sor their affa 
mall have but bad success Also it is cross 
E © navigators; - and such as. contemplate i Mn 
stars, and are wizards. And if any one't 
is in search of a thing that is lost, dre: 
this dream, he shall never find it. To poq 
this dream is good, for they had necd | 
great sleep, when they would write vers 
- To. sick persons this dream brings daily e 
ee for death. If any one dreams 
hath lost one eye, all above mentioned a 
significd, will befal him but in Part or 5 
. Moreover, thou mult * consider, 
"the right eye fig nißeth the son, brothe 
and father, che kel the Nene, sister a 
mother. To have three ot four eyes, to hi 
that determinet! 'to take 4 wife and hath 
v7 "children, and defirerh to have,” it is good. 
is also good to an osurer,, for he fhatl hi 
3 great. "sums . of money; but to him that o. 
tis ill: It adtnonishes the rich man to ket 
od guard to himself and His posstMons, | 


a 3. 


=. —_— - 7 — — 
* 
0 = 
Ng 


an ah 


155 o \- W 


N 


full 


real 


Hi Interpretation of Dreams. 28 
ason of some fraud and secret deceit, But 
Mo a coney-catcher, and a fair woman, to have 
ore eyes is not good; for he sbal] have mare 
yes which shall apprehend him, and she shall 
ave many of her clients attacht about her. 

Yreover, if any one d-eameth that he hath 
1 yes in his feet or hands, he shall fo lose his 
Woh on one (ile of his body, that the said side 
all be diseased, b.aten or hurt. I knew a 
Dan chit dreamed that his eyes fell into his 
ect, and he fell not blind. but mai ricd a!) his 
daughters to his servants. To have another 
ans eyes, signifieth loss of fight > But fo e 
vow him whose eyes he thinketh he hath, _ 
e shall keep his child, or some other great 
realure of hi. 4; 


[i 


Of the Nose. 

OR to have a sair and great nose is good 

to all; for it signifieth subtility of sease, 
proyidence in affairs, and acquaintance; with 
great personages. But to have no.nose, fign- 
eth the contr ry; and to a sick man, death; 
Wor dead mens heads have no notes. To have 
wo noses is discord with his domestick kindred. 


"= Of the Cheeks, r 

O have the chceks fat and full, is good sor 
all, especially to Woman; but flat and 
F full. of wrinkles, nd heaveness. 


= 


4 


IX 


* 
3 * 


6 4RTITMEDORUS. 
„ Of the Jams and Lips KF 
THE jaws - represent cellars, shops, afin 
Other things accustomed to keep mot 
chandizes, or drugs; the lips represeifiai 
hole wh ch kiss and cmbrace us, and wh Mr 
ate often about us, as wife, children, p 
rents allies, so that if the one or ih 
other secm to have any harm or mischanc 
it signifieth u to us, that the affairs of cu 
kius folks are not in good plight. 
= . f the Beard. 

C To have a Beard long, thick, and u 


| handsome, it is good for him which 
curious to speak weil, as an ambassador, a 
Orator, a Lawyer, a Phi osopher, and fc 
those who have a desire to learn arts, « 
| sriences. If a widow woman dreams sh 
hath a beard, she shall have an husband 
which shall be kind and bountiful : if she b 
married, then she shall lose her husband, e 
be seperated from him, and govern her hou 
alone, as if she were bcth husband and 
wife together, if she be not with child, or 4 
law; for if the first, she shall have a son; iff 
the second, she shall persevere in her opini# 
on, bearing a high mind, and regarding he 
| ” honour, as if she was a man. To a your 
child, this dream figniheth death; but tc 
© him which is now in his youth beginningssoi 


V, Interpretation of Dreams. 27 
> have a beard, it is a sign he shalt rise by 
mself, and put, himlelt. forward, of what 
tate soever he be. The beard falling, or 
t away, or by force plucked away by the 
ands of another, as it signifies loss of pa- 
nts, so also i is hurt and dishonour, 


3 Of the Teeth. „ 
TE upper teeth signifieth the best kin- 
dred of the house, and the lower tecth 
ignifieth the inferiour: For you must kn, 
hat the month representeth the houle, T | 
eth, inhabitants; those of the right fige 
he men; the other, the women: or other- 
ise, the right signifies the elder; the left, the 
ourger: ine. eye teeth, them of middle age, 
he great teeth the old folks. Wherefore, 
what kind of tecth so.ver a man dreams he 
Yosl.th, he shall lose some such: Personage as 
hat tooth significth. But when teeth sig- 
ifieth loss of goods, by the great teeth are 
eant hidden treasures, by others a vessel or 
ome other thing of little importance. To 
uch as are in dert, what kind of tooth so- 
; ever fall out, it certifies them that they shall 
iniquit themselves: The teeth falling out a! 
het one bow, signifieth that the house shall 
und be forsaken and abandoned of all inhabitants. 


ta For such as are sick to dream that any tootb, 
WE ot without 


com. 


to have them cf lead or tin, it is also sha 


= IX TIE DON US. 


vithout death: It wcre better for him 
'd:cam that he should lose all his Teeth, folf 
then he would recover the sooner. For 
'S.rvant to have no Tecth, is a lign of liberty 
to Merchants, good Gain of their mercha 
due, charges and trafficks. Teeth which e 
scem to grow in such Sort as if the one wou 
exceed the other, signifie Scdition in t 
Housc ; or if they seem to move, though th 
tall not our. Those which have black ** 
or rotten broken Teeth, and dream they lo 
them, shall be delivered from their evils ant 
anger. Also by this Dream, fome have lol 
their old Folks. To have Teeth of Gold, 8 
good for such as study to speak well; wy 
others, it is hurt in their houk: by fire; . 
others, sicknels by abundance of choler. T 

have their Teeth of Wax, it is sudden Death 


and dishorour; of glass or wood, viole F 
death; of silver, you shall get Money. 18 
Eloquence: to the rich, it is great Expendf. 
in Hospitality and nect ssary Provision. TY 
dream to lose his teeth, and recover othe 
5 change of estate into good or evil, accorc 
ing to the quality of the teeth. To dream th 
his teeth are in his hand or bosom, is loss e 
children. To grate his Teeth a 1 hi 
tonęue, is to end his Pains and mi ; : 


1 


1 


9 


— 


* : 


«© 


His Interpretation pf Dreams. 29. 
| mien , blood ; and of cbolerick and, 
melancholy bumours. | 
OR to vomit much blood, and of a good. 
Colour, is good fur him which is poor, - 
ir he, shall get st re of money. It is allo 
cry good for Pian which ha h no Children; 
0 .whose kindred are in a strange Coun- 
: The first shall see a. Child of tis own | 
other bis Kindred returning home. To 
555 blood is not gocd for him tnat would be 
idden. To vomit corrupt blood is sicknets 
*"Þ all. To cast a little blood in spittir g, 
Fretells sedition; as 1 have known b bo, Ex- 
Frleoce. To vomit Phlegm (be the Humour 
holerick or melancholy) is good for him 
hich is in Mifscry, anguish or sickness, for 
' foretells an end of all his evils. To vo- 
ait Meat signifieth hurt. Also to vomit his 
Heels foretels the Death of Children, to 
ather and Mother; and to them which 
ave, no Children, the loss of the dearest 
ing they have among we, Goods z 0 
ck person it is death, — I 
"Of the rect, e bew many Head: Tus 
VERY Suruncle, Malady,” or Tap 50 ft Qi: : 
on about the Neck, head ag bean, 
Seth sickac's, indiffcrently to all. T 
ave two or three heads is good for him 
ee ee af 
B 3 goods 


* 


30 IRT THE DO RUS. 


— 


goods, and also shall have a' wife and children 
of good nature: to a rich man it bgnificth 
_ adversity by means of his kindred. 


Of being Behgaged. 


1 O dream that he is beheaded; whether 
-justly or otherwise, is ill to him which 
hath a, father, mother, and children ; for he 
shall lose them. Some alio having had this 
dream, have lost their wives, friends, and 
farms; and others having houscs, have lost 
them: And he which hath all these things, 
shall not have good luck with them all, (as IK 
have known by experience,) he shall ad es 
- that which is Ap pinot and which h 
shall esteem most dearly. This dream is gooc 
for him which is ere of any crime, and i 
in danger of death: But to changers, Usu- 
yers, masters of galleys, or merchants, and al 
such-as gather money it signifietb the loss of 1 
sum of money. This dream is good for deb 
tors. He which is in a far country and hat ha 
this dream, shall return into his own, He 
which is in suit for his inheritance, sh: all ob- ir 
tain his suit : But incase of were is. 
* be hall be overthrown. A, g eK 


m e N 9 0 nd 


2 Ka R to have the head turned so that Va 


looks backwards, forewarns one not told 
0 out of his — Þ- and to enterprize no 
; — , 3 2 8 % 


— 


Hi Interpretation f Dreams, 34; 


Fairs, let the issue be bad. They Loy 
eina far country shall return home. NY 


To have the. Head of any Beast. 
DO have the head of a lion, a wolf, a pan- 
ther or elephant, instead of his own Tak 
Hood : For he which attempteth th: 
ond his power, and h.th this dream, ale at- 
zin unto great dignicy and -honour: Many 
efiring offices and placcs of credit, after this 
ream have obtained them. To dream you. 
aye the head of a dog, horie, or ass, or such, 
pur footed beast, is servitude, pain and misery. 
To have a birds head, argues one shall not 
ay long in his country, 


To how his Mead between bis Hand. 
F one dreams that he hath his head be- 
tween his hands, it is good for him that. 
--Hath- neither w. fe nor children, and to hint” 
Bhat defireth the return of any one afar offs 
HAnd besides if one be careful to comb and 
b-Frim his head which he seems to hold betweent © 
Vis hands, it is a fign that he shall dispose well“ 
f his business, and have aa end of his evils: 
nd adverliti s. This dream signifieth thus 
it uch, if besides that head which one holds 
tobn his hand, he seemeth to have another na- 
nofural head of his own; else not. {0 8 


rs, The 


. 


= ARTIMEDORYS. 


To have borns. 


don to dream have ox "horns, © 
any other such - ike violent be ast, fore 
"Tels violent Death, and chiefly beheading, it 
being incident to horned beasts. _ 


Of the foulders. 


J Houlders thick and. fi:shy are good to al 
Men, excepting them only that are im 
Nn To the first it signifieth muc 
strength ang profper.ty ; to the other, tha 
they shall be long in captivity. If the Shoul 
ders be difeased, lean or troken, it fignifi 
eth the contrary. to all beforefaid ; ard often 
times faretels the death or sickuess of brethren : 
Of the Breast and the Dag. WF 
A by have the breast whole, is good, as al * 
fo to have it hairy, is a sign of gain mh, 
Men, but to Women it foreteis Widowhood 
The Dogs fair and without any evil is good 
and if they seem more gross, yet by good 
means and grace they signfie Children ande 
Poft-sfions to come; but if they be sorr, as full 
of Ulcers, it is fickness to come. The Dug 
falling is deach to her Children that dream 
10 3 e if le have none, it is poverty to di 
self. To have many Dogs, thinking she sces 
them bigger than is usual ro a Woman, figni- 5 
fieth she fall follow the Trade of * kellg an aa 
2 ip 


* 


To be wounded in the Stamach by any 
dung men or women it denen. oo 


of the . 


TE * 2 fair and firong; WD... 


sperity to Tradesmen, To him which 
ars Arrests or Imprisonment, this dream is 
-. You "must remember that we said 


ch out 


the Son, the left the Wife, the Mo- 
, the Sister, and Strvant; the right fig- 

ifierh such Goods as are to get, 2 left 
3oods already gotten. If therefore © one 
treams that he soseth his right hand, he 
vill lose something which it signifieth. In 
general the Hands fignifies neither good nor 


some part, signifies burt or loss of Scr. 
rants. To Scriveners, Orators, and Attor- 


MWcys, it hanificth that  t=cy. shall. want Im- 


more than they OWe : * To Usurers loss by 


no Fingers, and he 'was attached by a Cre- 
ditor that lent him money without an Obli- 
vention. To have more fingers than ordina- 
may, Gignifteth the contrary, namely, to owe 
th and not 10 pay + Some *( though” geceivad 
upp B 5 have 


rey ihe right band signified the Father 


bad z to lose all the | erik of the - Hand, - 


Ployment: To Dchtors, that? they shall pax 


| oecrest., I know a man that dreamt he had. 


His Interpretation" of Dreams. 32 | 
rake is ill news to old Women: and ta 


ng." * 


34 AR'TITMEDORUS. 
have thought this a good dream, but it is the f 
contrary ; for he that hath more fingers than 
natural, thinks and finds it ill: and if tne 
over - plus fingers are idle, they make their n 
riddle. To have hair which clives to the 
joints, is captivity; but if it cometh on the 

| palm of the hand, it is idleness, especially to la- 
bourers and artificers. P-ofþ- -y 4 
To have many hands is good for an ertificer, 

or handicrafi-man ;. for this dream tells him ex- 
presly. thou sbalt have so much work, that thou} 
ali have need of many bands; and to good men 
also it is good, for it tells them they shall get 
children, servants, or money; as I have known 
by experience : but to wicked men it is capti- 
vity, and that some shall lay their hands upon 


them. l 1s | Lf 
0 the Ribs and Nauill. 
'A LL the #1ibs, ard the inner- side of the — 
Leliy, containing the bowels, to the privi- 
fes, is AHrengib of body, and abundance of 
| goods and riches: if they seem diseased, they a 
finifie diseases of the body and consumption of 
the purse. The navil is loss of farher and mo- 
tber to such as have them, and to others banish- 
ment. | | 9 


00 the inward Parts. _ 

6. 444 | RP - 35 | 1 Ei 1” 39 | $4 2 
F you dream you are dead; and see your 
inward parts according to their natural 
£6 Hh en eracr, 


1 


PR 
"Wc 
894 


= 3 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 35 

cr, it is gag to him that hath no abildres, © | 
Ind co him which is peer: for the one shall, 
ave children of his own, and the other riches. 
f his own. But to a rich man, and him 
hich would be close, it is shame and dis- 
Honour. It is evil to all, when they dream 
Bhat their intrails are seen of others, for it be- 
pkeneth troublesome affairs, suits in law, and 
credit, But if he dreams he is opened, and 
et sceth not his rails, it signifieth to him 
orfaking of his bouse, loss of children and 
Peath by + fcbness. It is also comfort for him. 
at is in misery, for he which loseth thole - 


et 

on Parts which . pain and grief, surely he 
i- Mall be delivered oat of distresi, Moreover we 
on must think, that the hear; signifieth man, 


nd the husband of the same woman that shall 
dream thereof, it is a wife of the same man 
and the bushand of che same woman that shall 
dream thereof, it is a wife of tne same man 
at dreams it: likewise also the Jungs.” But 
he liver signifieth the son, food and. the Fog, 1 the 
pall, cholerick and melancholly humours, money, | 


of f men, or wives: the spleen, pleasure, laughter, ' 
4 and vessel; the Belsy and guts, children, for they 


'7 for meat; likewise they signific Rserers. 
us signifie brothers and cousins. 


þ Of the Members. | | 

IRS T the members signifie the father and the 
le. the chilren, the wife, the friend, 

EE). the 


T. 


46 AR TIMED ORD 


the brother, and roufins ; allo. te fore of the 
body, eloquence and AHnotulkdgr, lör it is v 
| ee Again it Ggnifieih riches and pale 
on] because it increasetir and diminishetb. Al. 
so counsel-apd secrets, * also and servitude. - 
Alsoit fighthcth dignity and incrcase of honour; e 
and therefore when one dreams he feeth it 
in its eftate and place, it signifieth permanence 
of things represented and significd thereby; 
also increasing, diminishing and rcdoubling 
of things present to all, onty your wife, and 
| your friends excepted; for it takerh them a · 
| way, b-cause a nan may not impart their 


use to any 

Of the Grain and Thighs. | 
THE Groin sigaificth the fame. things as ©. 
- the Members precedent : In like manner; 
3 the 7 gb. except when they foretel sma 


je to the rich, or rather expence in n | 
a - Hcafures with loss and burt. 


| 853 Of the Knees, | 

b Tur Knees being strong and sturdy, FI 
B he Journeys or other motions and opera- 
| tioas of Health: but being weak and discasedf 
th: contrary: A tres or branch coming out 
of the Knee, fignifieth /owness and hi drance 
to a stk man oftentimes death. The knee; sig J 
| nifie.the brethren and famuliar Finn and 


fo netimes children. 


0 . 


Es Trbterpretation ria. of. 
y the small o the by, the fret and the. beets... 


2 femall of the Ig! the feet, and OW 25 
have as it were the fame Fgnificarion'as | 
e te. To have many feet, is good for 
Wrchants and masters of fps, for they shall. 
mmand many men: and it fignificth rest to 
> master himself. This dream is good for 
poor man ; to a rich it i fickness, Manx 

by this dream have lost their U, and _ 
ralefaors having it, have been A 
o put their feet in the fire is HI to, and figat. 
th loss of goods, children and serv : : But 
o such as undertake a wager of running, it is 
zood, for they shall run swiftly, as if they had 
re en their feet. Also if one dream that he 
ath Jost his foes, and goeth barefoor, it 


jgnifics that be shall have pain in his feet: 
no some it betokeneth much /fickness in bed. 
Likewise to dream that one would fain run, but 


Kannot, means that his Affairs shall be An 
ni = hard to accomplish, 


sed | Of the back. 


TE back and all the hinder part Ganifies 
124 old age, therefore as one thinketh his back 
und and hinder Parts to be, so — de in * 
188 


OfN® | 
= 
bs > * J 
; " , ". 
" Ts 
. 
* 


4 * ARTIMEDORUS. 


; _ Of Transmutation of the Person. 
| be changed from little to great, an 
from great again to be bigger, 85 that yc 
Exceed not reason, is good; for it is increase of 
business and goods: but to be greater tha 
common use, is death. Also it is ill for an old 
man to be changed into a young man, or 
young man into a child, for they shall change; 
do a worse estate; but the contrary is good, 0 
for they shall come to a better esfate, To dreansse e 
to be a woman, is good for a poor man, and a 
| servant, for the firft shall find those which will, 
|. cherish hm as a women, and the second sha - 
have less pair: but to a rich man it is ill, espe · Id 
cially if he have government of any publicl 8 
thing, it taketh away his office and authorityher 
because women must keep the Bou, To suchp t 
as <xcrcite bodily labour ir is fickness, for womensy 
are commonly weaker than may. If a womanke: 
«+ dream that she is a man, and she be not mar nd 
; og she shall have an husband, or if she haveske; 
. children, she shall have a /ox, or shall b 

changed into the nature of a man: 
| 4 if f the be both married and have a son, 

. she shall be a widow. To a maid-servant it sig- 

nifieth she shall have great servitude, and un-Hise 
dergo pain as a man: it is good for an Harlot, forso: 

| she shall leave her wicked courses. Again, if aþor 
| poor man or woman dream that they are madeþyy 
AN. | all 


* 


nit 


3! 


At Tatefpretation'df Dreant. 39 
of Gold, they shall be gich; but if they be 
eb they shall be circumvented; for gold and 
ver have no spies. Lo a fick person it is death. 
o be of brass good for a Warrior and a ser- 
Wont; for the one shall have victory and a 
aue erected, and the other shall have. Sberty. 
o dream that you are of iron, foretelleth in · 
nite miseries. To be of. earth, betokenetn 
ub, Except such as live by earth, as Potters. 
o be of Fong is to receive blows and wounds, 
one dream he is changed into the shape of 
beast, he myst judge according to the beasts 
uure, and of that I will treat in the second 
dok, in my discourse of the chase. I have 
pe · pierved, that it is good for all to dream they 
icke fair, and of good grace, and strong, and 
I)er” without exceeding common cuftom, for 
Ic be too fair, too brave, and too strong, is as 
nennuch as to be ill favoured, faint-hearted, and 
atheak ; which things signifie death to the sick, 
arJng to lovers ill success, and attachment for 
Welreason, 7 


Of Arts, Works, : or Exercises. 


d: 
yall 


De 


an: 
, / Hosoever in his dream seemeth to do 
18 that which he hath learned and exer- 


1N-Fised, shall have good success, and is very good 
forso all; foretelling, that all sball come to ho- 
f afour by his business and enter prize; but if in 
def our dream you have not good issue, it signi- 


- - if he nd himself: hindered, 


a 41 MEDORHS. 
feth'the contrary. M one i» his dream doth 
that which he hath not learned, arid it hat 1 
good issue in his dream, then it is good; bus 
3 and Cannot ri 7 vil, 
i ro good, it is anger; and let of bussness untisor 
he — cue To play the hesbindman c = 

im mo keketh a wif, or wheek hat ; T 
_ ehildren 5 fer the d is his wife, the seed$Þ |: 
and trees his children, the whcat- males, by $00 
bartkey females and abortives';z © but te othe qua 
this dream betokereth fickneis and anger: II y. 
any one be sick in the house where this dreainþ"4 
is, it betokeneth death ; for the seed and plant th 
are put in the earth as (hb: Dead. To reap, Pon 
Eut, ta trim vines, and to plough against har a] 
vest, betokens that your affairs and — "shall" / 
be deferred til che aceustomed time of doingfl © 


1 


b them: But if the horses seem to fink inte the* 


| of: husbandry scem tuddenly- to be lost; if 


'S 


ground, or that the spade, or other instrume 


betokeneth loss of labour, dearth to cor Li 
and ill harvest weather. Likewise, if an) 8 
husbandman dream that he is ploughing on Af 


kill, and that on a sudden he is loosing: the a 


horses, and setting them up in the table, il 
betokeneth lofs by ill husbardry ; and * 
that the Horses shall not stand, but fall sick in 
- the Stable. Ta govern #ship, ifone rcp 
„, and honour without ck as 


* 
* 


His Interpretation of Dream, 42 
oil dat it be without doubt or pin, it is good: 
it ut if one be troubled with tempest, or if. the 
bu@/ be broikd and broken, it is abup dance of 
Imp ws which I have often known by experience z 
tiger to dream of one that is in a water-mi:l, sig- 
 oaltificth much busineis; and the water held- ng 
4&ack,. fortelleth much trouble and difficulty 
n the performance thereof. To cut and faw- 
edda leather, to married folks is gocd : It is also 
chehood fer him which would marry, or get ac- 
exMuaintanc: and allics, by rcas.n of close and 
\ T&>yncd seams. But to die eatbers is ill to all, 
mind reveal. th sccreis. If one in his drcam scem- 
nth to go on narrow banks and ridg s of 
etebouses, it is ill, for it fi anificth - decay and. 
ar haling into Poverty. Also to dream of an ping 
Allr Bing, betoken.th much trouble 185 at- 
nol ction: but to sce medici nes is worst of all. 
— lo be a Goldsmith, fignifi.th harm to bim 
Phi h drcams it, by re 1 of poison and in- 
Pruments thi.t they hindle. © To be a graber, 
Verner ot tarver: of images and figures, it is 
n Bood for adulterbrs, pratlers, cozeners,. a d 
n Ncefver s; becadse cheir arts she w o her eff cts 
an the ti ue. Uto otheis it signifieth boner ;, 
For such works are shcwed unto many. BY 


e | CF 


- OR E L in Iron, and strike upon the © | 
Ls hgnfieth noise and suits in LN] 
nat . | P tne 


J 


— 


* 


ces in important affairs. Also to travel over P 
bigh hill and mountains, and rocky places, 
S fignificth advancement, but with much diffi- rot 

culty obtained: notwithstanding, 


right way, it betokeneth some friends that will. 
© be helpers o him. 


underst and, that it fignifteth as much to see 


profit, marriage, or alliance, but ro some 
* hinderance of voyages: those which scowre 


T O learn the Letters is good for the ig- 5 


— 


1 ARTIMEDORUS. 
the like we must judge in all other arts, offer 
the persons which dream them. And we must eo 


the tradesman working in their shops and 
tools, as to see himself use the same art. Not- 
withstanding there is difference between tools, 
those which cleave and break, signifie discord; 
and hurt, those which unite and bind, signifie 


or smooth, appease strife: those which address 
and. compass, ignific revealing of rr 
you aw fo see in Geometricians. | 


Of Travelling. 1 

FF. any one dream that he is a travelling 
through a wood, and that he sticketh in 
the why and bushes, this dream is evil, forf 
it betokeneth many troubles and hinderan- 


if he meet 
with any one that scemeth to giret him the 


Of the Letters. 


norant; for some will betide them, þ 
but with labour and fear. But to lim which 
9 | rs knows] 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 43 
Orows the Letters, to learn them again isnot' _ 
uitF-od; for it is part of a child to learn; now 
lee gaifieth to him hinderance of affairs, and 
nal issue: only it is good for him which de- 
Ot gretn to have a son; for not he, but his fon 
Is, hall learn. If a Grecian dreameth that he 
rd tarneth Latin Letters or on the contrary, 
fie ay Reman the Greet Letters, they shall travel 4 
NeInd go from the one country to the other. 
TeMany Romans by th.s dream have had Gre- ; 
elan, and as many Grecian Romans to their 
as Vives. To read well and truly Barbarian' 
sc strange Letters, signisie that they shall go 
| ito that country, and have goods and ho- 
ng out there; but to read badly signifies the 
in lontrary: or that the sick man shal] enter in- 
or lo foolishness and frenzy, by reason of the 
n- savage and strange speech, which a raving 
er n speaks. Al Letters of any Language, 
WP N ich, one cannot read, signifie anger and 
n- wuble for few days, if the writing be lide's; | 
et pat for longer time if it be much, 


/ Plays and aftimes. 

0 play Ye Pl Top 55 pain and travel, 
 wheteof notwithstanding hall come 
ro 1 or to run, or to dance, ani: 
8 eth prosperousnes in affairs: but to dance 
N, ei thout musick, soretelleth want of money. 
so 0 * * play at Tennis, 2 long 

Ens. .. noe 


=. — FEY i yy 4 | | - | 
44 4 RTIMEDORUS.. 
ngise, and quarrels, and often betokegetn love 


towards a whore, tor the ball re pre sents the 
whore, b: cute it hath no stay, and it goet 


through the hands of many. 


O plays, games and instruments. _ 
F any one dreameth of the . trumpet; td 
them which would fight, 'tis good, and 
to those which have lot th: ir Servants. But 
it reveal. th s-crets, by reason of the geen 
found, and it killeth the sick : Also to Ser- 
vants it promiseth liberty. But to wind 2 
horn is ill, and forbiddech to undertake any 
law suit. Every instrument which one may 
blow, lignifieth, trouble. To dream that you 
pla the public cryer, may, be interpreted as 
to sound the trumpet; to play upon à reed, 
or upon a bag pipe, is good to all. To. ling 
and play upon the, hup, at Offering; and 
5 saci, is good for weiidings,, aod. contract 
ing of affnity.; but it s ill for other Affairs, 
= to many it signifie ih che Gout, h. cause of cords 
and nerves, To play or see played tragedi. s, 
f gnificth travel, fighting, injury, and a thou- 
L- sand Evilsz but to play metry plays, is a Mert. 


Kl 


: . 


N 
13 
Ld 
= . 


— Yom; affairs 3 and to hear. ioging, signi- 
Receptions) 05 50,012 0% „ e &f 
ren: Of riding. N his dr 
4 ride a hotse nimbly, is good for all; 
for th | horse signifies 3 Waman, or a 
— 245% | a . Fr end 


7 
— 


93 


> Bs — Dell | 45 "4 


ried, the Ship, the M-ficr and gvy'd: to 
Kovern, and the good friend: So 103 as he 
Naas his hors- well, so shall be do al this. 


to a sick person it s drath; as also to a 
hariot of four wheels, To ride a hoi se thro? 
e town is good for him which underiaketh 
o play a prize, and to a sick Man; for tbe 
dne- shall gain the prize, and the other shall 7 
de hea ed ; but to ride out of Toun is quite 
ontrary. For one to dream that he rideth 
Ppon a wild herse, if he be able to govern 
Fim, and to keep the sadd e, it is gooi; for 
is dream signifies rule and dignity; but if a 
e fall or be throw n out of the sadule, it is ill, 
ignifieth disgrac, di sponour or N proach. | 
To lead or guide cnari::ts through woods and 

d. 2 fignifieth death to all at hand, - 


Of the race. 


to 
nd 


* OR to ron is good to all, except to sick 
al persons, when they dream they come 
2 to the erd of their race z for it si gnifith h 
ul. hat — oy: shall come to the end of their 
488 
ni 


2 b put out of office. =» . 
F any one dreams he is 7 rl, ti | 
place, tflate, and dignity It is ill to all, aggd 

8 e sach as are fick, i 2 


ad — l 4 


— Wn 


he carthgnificth as much as tie horse, but 


146 AR FI MED. 0E US. I 
f e lu 
Fon to wrestle with any party Geng th tr * 
with him. And among such as are at strif'® 
- alrcady; he which dreameti that he is super 
our, shall vanish, if. they strive not sor heritaę 
for in such a controveriie, it were better to Pa 
beaten. To wrestle with a strar ger, is dang 
of sickness. If a man fight with a child, and e 
3 throw him on the ground, he shall lose ilsen 
| _ -szme frieod by death: It he be beaten, he shaP®© 
have mockery and sickness. It is good for * 
little child to wrestle with a man; for he sha 
do great matters more than one would think nre 
but if he wrcstle or combate with a champio at 
this dream is not god for him. To wrestf* 
with d ath betokereth sickness or debate, anf 8 
suits in law with the chil ren or heirs of deaf®? 
men. But it is good always for the rich maf* 
to think or dream that he is in authority. 


Of Combaling. 

F OR to combat with any one, is ill to * 

men; for besides shame, he sball hay 

8 hut. Likewise it signifieth much strife a Fai 
cContention: And to be wounded in fight bp b 
tokeneth shame and dishonour. Notwithith 
standing it is good for such as live by blooqak 
| Thed, as surgeons, butchers, and cooks. -. o 
To Baibe, and go into the Hot-house. p fl 
OR to wash and bathe himself in baths anke 
hot- houses, Ggnifieth riches and prol perifill « 


al 


re 


d 


Ld . 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 47 
Ind health to the sick, But to wash and bathe 
-@Þimself contrary to the common use, as in his 
ri oaths, is cvil; and betokeneth fickn-is and 
erpreat anger. It is ill to a poor man, if he be 
800 Couragious to wash himself, and it he have 
> any wh. ch rub him, for it fortellech long 
g ekness. In like fort it is evil to the rich, if 
Ie be alone, and have no body to aid him. In 
general, it is bad for all not to sweat, or to see 
habe bath in an cpen place, or to find no water 
or it. In brief, it is very ill, when it is other- 
snahise than custom, for it significth ill issue of 
n{;Forerprizes and affairs. To be washed with 
ioFater naturally hot, is a sign of death to the 
eftþck, of hindrance. of affairs to the whole. It 
an good to dream that you wash in fountains, 
geaboods, and current waters, and in fair and clear 
maboods; but not to swim, for that were a sign 
danger and sickness. 
„„ „% Äçꝙ·  - 0b | X 
oO drink cold wat:n, is good to all, but 


hay hot, fgoifieth sickness and hindrance of 4 


 anfffairs. , To drink wine with reason, and not 


- bþ be drunk is good: but to drink much, and 


vithithout reason, signifieth much evil i also it 
ooqakes you be in the company of drunkards. 
| To drink sweet wine, or to see fair women, or 
) flecp under shady trees, to him that would 


5 anjke a wife, it betokeneth a good success in love. 
erigll compounded wines and portions mann 
Ly * 


a . , * 


er- 
* \ - 


#8 ARTIMEDORTS. 


otherwise than naturally, is good for rich me 
because of heir delicacy : But it is evil 
r folks, which never drink them but 
| kncfs. To drink urine, signifieth sickne 
= - - 200 to drink oyl signifieth poison or sicknes 
{ _ Tothirst and find no drink neither in wel... 
fountains nor rivers, is ill, and a sien w_ 
finish his business 3 tut the contrary is 
If one dream that hz is drunk or fick, he th 
be born withal, as such Persons are: Mor 
bodouer to driak in vessels or tinkards of gol. 
silver or earth, is good for all, by reason of t * 
lid matter and ate: of the vessels, which f A 
nifie t1anquility.® Also © vessels of horn 4 
good, for they burst not; vessels of glals a 
© evil, because they break easiily ; they also 
vesl s erets, by reason of their transparer.c 
other wise thefe vesse!s may siignifie our frie 
which we embrace; when therefore th: va 1 
sels are broken, it siignifieth the death of sorf aq 
of our friends or affinity. I know by exp. 
*ence, that to dream to fee a glass broken, s m 
nifieth shipureck to Marin rs. There 1 
\ccrtain'vesT |s with ftrait nouchs, Which if c he 
'Thall sce broken, they fignifie end and isue i © 
+bukitions and anguish, tir 
Of berbs, roots and grains in postage. F 2 
ILL herbs and roots which dive sro I 
smell in catipg, reveal scerets, and fip al 


bes anger, wie all ber a ttendanec. That wh 4 


— wu - 
* * 


dil 
; 


< 


| 


| His Inlerpretacis en 0 Bran. 49 
eaten raw, as lettice, sorrel, purslane, and 
others, signifies trouble and difficulty in the 
anagement of affairs. 

To dream of eating medicinal- herbs, as 
dels, mallows, burrage, and the like, signi- 


ne 


| 
| 


dusincss, because they make the body soluble, 
To dream of eating coleworts signifi -s vex- | 
[ on. The French navew-gentle, and u- 
umbers, denote vain hope. Some are of 
71 e nion, that when sick parisons dream of 
Inelons or cucumbers, it is a prognoftick of 
| Fecovery, by rcason of their humidity. 


Of CORN, and other Grain. 


O dream that you sce corn ehred, and ga- 
ther it signifies profit and r ches. : 

| To dream you see stacks of corn, signfiies 
rofit and abundance to the dreamer; and on 
he contrary, to sce a small quantity, Aenne 
mine necessiiy- 
To dream of eating white bread made ol 
heat, signifies profit to the rich, and damage 
d the poor; on the contrary, to dream of 
king coarse bread, denotes to the poor, pro- 
and gain; ro che rich, losses. 
trol To dream of eating barley-bread, signifies 
2alth and content. | 
To dream of «ating broth is a good gn, 
id —_ Rn and gain. | 
| C 


2 
8 2 
- 
\ 


. C 
le 


ep: 


wh 


To 


es freedom from trouble, and expedition of 


| 5 ARTIMEDORUS. 


'' 

1 
1 
[1 
1 
. 


a 2 signifies, either that you shall .marry a 


And dissention. 


of rice, de notes abundance of obstruction. The 


Io dream that one sees a barn stored with 


r ch Wife, over hrow your adversary at law, 
" inherit land, or grow rich by trading or wives: 
it fignifi.s also binquetting or merry- making. 
- To dream of eat ng prase well boiled, denotes 
succ.fs and expedition of business. . 
To dream of cating beans, sign fies trouble 


- To dream of lentiles, fign fies corruption; 


millet, signifies poverty and indigence. 

To dre m you sce or eat mustard- seed, 
that is a bad sign, unless it be to physicians, fl 
to whom sach dream are aGVantagenus, tl 


 Jhe E AR T E. 


F any one dreams that he hath good land 

well It inclosed bestowed upon him, with plea 
fant pastures, he will have a handfome wife 
according to the seeming goodness of the land 

But it the land see med spacious and not in 
closed, that denotes pleasure, joy and riches 
Gable to the extent of the land. | 

Inn seem that the faid inclosed lands had 
fair gardens, fountains, fields, pleasant grove 
orchards adjoining thereunto, that signi 
-fies he will marry a discreet, chaste and beau 
titul wife, ard that she will bear bim var 
| kandsome children, | 


1 


A 
” . 
0 7 * 


His ont of mY 5 1 


17 he faw the land fown with wheat, that 
signifies Money and Profit, with care and in- 
"3 dunn 

If he bi ir sown with any kind of pulse, 
8. tas denotes affliction and trouble. bs 

If he faw it sown with millet, that Genifies | 
vast riches to be gained with ease, and much Y 
le delight. 

K Ita man in holy orders dreams any such | 
nel ching, then 1 it is taken for the riches and con- 

tentment of his mind. 

If you dream you see the earth black, that 

fignifies sorrow melancholy, and weakness of 

the brain. 

To dream that you see the earth quake, sig- 
Ivifies that your affairs and life are in danger 

of be ing lost. | 

l To dream that the whole earth quakey fl 
disies an edict from the king, that will en, 
ll the inhabitants of the kingdom. - N 

If you dream that the house shakes, i it is an 
dict imply agaipst the house, tho? it presages hy 
also loss of goods, and suits at law. 1 
If the walls, doors, and top of the house fall 
MD) reason of the ea fo the ch that denotes de- 

ruction and death to the chief persons in the | 
iouse. 
If a king, or any Aber prince, Jeans that — 4 
palace or throne is overturned and borne 
C 2 | don 


fo — 


* 


SY 


$22 ARTIMEDOR US. 
daun by an earthquake, he will suddenly. die, 
Ot lose. his kingdom. | 
If any one dreams that a mountain is fallen 
upon a valley, that signifies that soms great 
lord will oppress and destroy good men. 
If any one secs a Town that he knows, sunk 
by an earthquake, that is a prognostick of fa. 
mins, war and desolation, by the indignation 
| | of a prince: but if he knows not the town, it 
p Ggnifies that the nation at enmity with the king 
+ . shall be d.stroycd by the same means. 0 
To dream you sce great dttchs or precipices, 
ani that you fall into them, significs that he 
that dreams will suffer much injury, and hazard 
his peris en, and his be in danger by fire. 
Io dr.am of kissing the earth, siznifics sad- 
— þ TY ORE 
To dream of beieg in a meadow, is a good 
sizu to husbindmen and shepherds; snd to 
others, it denotes oòdstructien of business. 
=” To dream that you are in a fair, straight, ! 
W level and pleasant way, signifi-s joy, prosperity, 
W. and success; and a bad way the quite 
contrary. Zong 8 
=. Of VeorTATIyE Creatures. 
_ - Of FLOWERS. 
= HERE are three forts creatures; the 
= vegetative, the sensative, and rational 
The dreams of which three we will succefsivi) 


handle one after another. 
2 , / | VUnde 


* * — : : 
* 


"His Fa del on of Drone. 53 


| Vader the vegetative creature- is comprized 
trees, plants, flowers and fruits, that receive 
their nourishment, vigour, growth and matu- 
rity froom the earth and sun. 

To dream of holding or smelling odor: ferous 
flowers in their scason, significs joy, pleasure 
and consolation. 

To dream cf seeing and smelling flow rs - 


out of scason z if they are white, that sig afhcs 


obstruct on in businefs, and bad success in his 
enterprizes z if yellow, the impedim-nt will not 
be so considerable ; and if they be red, the diffi= © 
culty and nusance will be extreme; and for the ; 
best part it signifieth death. 08" — 

To dream of secing and smel'ing alle s in 
the s-ason of: the year, is a good sign to all 
persons, except those that are diftemp-r*d, a 
who through fear conceals themsclvs ; for "they 55 
are in danger of death or great sickness oa. 
if the dream be when roscs are out of feasun, _ 
it fign:fieth the contrary. — 

To dream that you smell marjoram, by! op. 
rosemary, sage, and other herbs of the same 
nature, significs labour, trouble, sadness and 
weakness, physicians only excepted, to whom 


such drcams arc propitious. 
If any one dreams that he sces, holds, or 
© smells to lillies out of their scason, it Bangs 
that the hope of the thing desired wil be frus- | 
trated. 


3 - f 
. . . 


| 54 4RTIMEDORUS. 


Laurel, the olive, or palm; if she be a woman, 


If one dreams that he sees or smells upon 


she shall b-ar children; if a maid, she will be 
suddenly married: if it be a Man, it fignificg 
amity, joy, prosp-ri:y, abundance, and good 
success in his enterpri zes. 


ARTIME- 


er ene - gow . 


2 


fl © 


n ard nor stopped, 


4E. MEDORUS” 
His Exposition of 5 


D R E. A M 8. 


The Second | Book. 


_ — 3. 22 13233 3 * 
- 


To watch. 5 


Ke Dream that in the Night one watch-' 
eth in a Chamber, signifieth to the rich 
great affairs, to the poor, and those that 

would ule any subtilties or deceits, it is good: 
For the first shall not be without work and gain, 
and the others undergoing their attempts with 
great subtilty, shall come to the 7 of their | 
enter prize. | 


To go out and (a {alute ene. 6. 


| dream that you are going out of che 
House in the pr and are not hin- - 
is good; for it signibeth 
your businefs shall have a good issue: But not 
to be able to get out, nor find issue out of 

the House, is hindrance to those that would 
travel, and imp:achment of affairs, and long 


fickness to the sick. To falute his familiar 


friend, to speak to him, and embrace him, is 
youu z for it fignifieth that you shall sp-ak and 
heat <_ news; but if they be hot our very 

C 1 my | 


56 ARTIMEDORUS. 
WU  familiars, but only simply known to us, th 
dream is not fo gocd : If they be our ene 


friendship with them. To kifs the dead, to 

bim that is fi-k, it fignifieth death: To him 

* which is in health, it forbids him to speak of his 
affairs at that presant, because he hath kissed 
the mouth of the dead : Notwithstanding, i 
the dead party hath. been our pleasant and pri- 
vate friend, it hindreth not a whit, either to 
ipzak or udertake any thing. 

Of the Apparel in general. 
HE Habits accustomed and agreeable to 
| the season, are good; as iu Summer an 
Habit of Linnen Cloth, and fine Wool; in 
Winter a new Garment and of strong Wool, 
ST To him only which is at Law, and which ss a 
| - Servant desiring liberty, new Apparel is bad; 
| because he must have long time t@ use them, 
and refuse thrm again. A white garment is 
good only to Priests; to others it signifie h 


& , trouble :'to Mechanicks it significth they shall 
have no work; it also revealeth Malefa&tcrs; 


- 


= to the fick it is death; but the black Garment 
ie is health. Notwithstanding J have often 
"seen poor men, servants, and Captives, having 
dream; d they were attired in black, die. This 
black Habit is bad, except it be to them 
which would do secret things. To have a Gar- 


3201 


ment 


mys, it significth that we shall enter into 


 wng mA npSDp n 2 2. 


th 


nc 


His Interpretation of Dreams, 57 
ment of divers colburs or scarlet, for priests, _ 
jesters and stage players, it is good ; to other» - 
it signifiech troubles, dangers ard revealing 
of secrets ; to the sick it is, they shall be tor- 
ment d with strang and abundant humours. 
A robe of scarlet to servants and rich men is 
good, signifying lib-riy and honour, or digni- 
ty; it killeth the sick, and bringeth greater 
poverty to the poor: To many it hith fig nifi - 


ed captivity : For the man clad in purple or 


scarlet, must also have a diadem or a crown, 


and many about him to guard his body. Every 
such robe died in scarlet, is io some hurts, 
others an ague. 1 1 
A woman's gown is good only to those which 
have no wife, and which come upon stages to 
play. Others after this dream lose their 


wife, or fall into great si kness, by reason of 


the del:cacy and effeminateness of those which 
wear such garments. And yet n«:twithstand- * 


ing, in case of rejoicing and assembles, neither 


Gowns of divers colours, nor women's gowns 
are bad. To have a Gown of the fashion. f 
a strange nation, is good luck among stran- 
gers, to him wh.ch purposcth to go, or re- 
main, or lead his life among them; to others, 
sickness and hindrance of affairs. To have a 
delicate and sumptuous gown, is gcod fur 
rich and poor: For to the first, their pr. sent 
prosperity shall continue; and to the other, 
| , C 5 5 - thiic 


$8 4RTIMEDORUS.” 
their goods shall increase. Broken and torn 
Gowns, is hurt and hindrance of affairs, , 
A coat, a jacket, or short cloak, or skirt of 
woolen cloth, is anger, and loss of a law- 
fult: wherefore it is better to dream you - lose 
them, than you have them, But the loss of 
any other habit is not good, except to the poor, 
 teryants, captives and debtors z . these gar · 
- ments. being lost, argue loss of evils which. in- 
compass them. For others, it is not good to 
dream of loss or nakednelis ; for it ret 
| loss of goods and pleasant things. A. fair and 
| brave. gown, and of divers — is good for 
rich and joyful women; for the one keeps her 
drave for her pkasures, the other, divers colours 
argue her profit, For to dream of shifting a 
irt or smock, or that the slothes are fallen 
from. the bed, doth signiße hard lodging: and 
much chifting in hs countries, It is always 
bdetter to dream to have good, fair, rica and 
garments, than lutle and dirty, except 


| . cleanly 
$ only 40 those which exercise slovenly and dirty 
- trades. - 
Do dream one wasbeth bis garments. : 
& ws dream to wash ones clothes, of another ® 


bodies, is to sustain and lofe, or escape 
| Sore hurt and danger about the body or Hife; for 
clothes being washed lofe their uncleannefs. 
This dteam also sheweth, that fore bedy 
shall learn and h our feerets : Eg ; 

8 Wa 


s Interpretation of Dreams. 59 | 


wash, is to take and amend or correct, 
therefore it is an ill dream for them which are 
fin doudt to be reproved or surprized. | 


Of exterior beauties. 4 

Ris of Iron about one, do fionifie gods, 

but with labour. Also rings of g ld 
which have (tones, are good; for those wh ch 
have no stones, signifie pair.s without profit. 
But always - massic and juil Rings are bet er 
than hollow, which fignifie deceit and falsho2d 
ard greater hope than profit. Rings of am- 
der, Ivory and such like, are good oniy for 
women. Carcanets, chains, pearls, precious 
ones, and all adornings of the heads, and 
SY necks of women, are good for women; to 


widows and maids they signifie marriage; to | 


en those which have no children, that they shall - + 
d have ; and thofe that have hufbands and 
ys Children, they betoken parchafes and riches': 27 
1d For as women are provid. d of thcs: d: ckinzs, 
pt fo shall they be stored of  Husbands, Children 
ty and Goods. But to men this dream fenificth 
decent, craft and confusion in accounts of mo- 
ney, not because of the matter, dg oth lorth 4 
and fashion. | 


' Of Gold and the loss of Rings, ___ 

Or a man to dream he hath Gold, is. cl 
bad, because of the mater, as evciy one * 

will say.z but contrary wise, it is good, as cg 


L -j 


haye 


$6 ARTIMEDORUS. 
have known by experience : But oftentimes, 
when one hath dreamed that he hath too 
mucn, or an excess, and ill-agreeing to the 
Sex, by reason of the fashion and figure, as to 
men's habliments, chains and carcanets. It 
happeneth in like manner, as for men to 
dream of a crown of gold, and Plate, and 
great pieces of gold: For when any one shal| 
uwe such-a dream, the gold fignifieth evil, 
not in respect of the matter, but the workman- 
sn p and figure. But if the head tires b 
1:it, broken or bruised in the dream, it is 
loss to a woman. If any one dream that hit 
- pockets arc sullof money or gold, it betoken- 
eth that he shall reccive but hitle money. Andi 
if a man dreameih that he hath found gold, 
and he cannut tell where to liide it, or that hei w 
bath found a purse of money, and is afraid 
to be taken with it, it b.tok-neth that he 
hall have lo,s by a Woman: Loss of Rings tc 
a man, sigaificth not only the Loss of them 
that had charge over his Goods, as the Wife, 
mae Tenant, &c. but also the loss of his gods, O 
lands and possessions; or that he will not cc 
Lend, or give away any more, to such as hel as 
F hath lent, and committed charge to, as beforessi ol 
= times: To many, this dream hath foretold} fe 
Þss cf eyes; for the eyes hath some agree - h. 
mont with the rings, by reason of the radiancess} h 
ol the stones, But when as your dream is — 0 
* a 0 0 


of Hose or Shoes, we most judge as of the 


apparel. 


TO dream to comb him or her self, is good 
10 both to man and woman, for it fignifieth 
ad to go out of evil time and affairs; but to plait 
and curl his bairs, is good only for women and 
i, courtiers which use it; to others it is debt and 


n impeachment for money, and fomerimes im- 


» | prisoning and sedition. 
Of the Looking Glass. - 


themselves, according to their true 2 
is good for him and her nich would be marr 
ed”; for the glass representeth to the Man, his 
wife, and to the woman her husband > To 
those which are married it betokeneth Chil- 


for it significth that they shall soon pass out 


Others by this dream have gone into a strange 


as he is, signifieth he shall be made a father 
of bastards, or other men's Children: But to 
see himself more ill favoured and deformed, is 


himself in the water, is death to the dreamer 
or some familiar friend of A. 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 61 


KOf- the Combing ones self, and ef cried. Hair. 


O be before a Looking-glass, and to see b 


dren : It is also good to fad and afflicted people, 


of heavinels, because heavy men look not in a 
glass. Bur this dream to the fick, is health. 


country. To see himself in the glass not such 


Jheavineis and anger. Also to dream to see 


4 a 


. 


f | 


„ ARTIMEDORUS. 


0 be air, and that which in there din. 


IE air clear and pure, is good to all, chief. , 
8 --* ly 19 those Which have loft goods, and 
Which would make voyages. The Air troubled 
and Cloudy, on the contrary, significth hinder. 
ance and anger. Rain without great wind or 
tem pest is good for all, except 10 those which 
8 go intoa strange country, and those which have 
WW, 4bgir. vocation and work abroad without shelter, 
W Little rain and drops of water, is good for 
plow. men; to others it is little gain. Great 
Azmpestuous Rains, are troubles, hurts and 
dangers, except to those which art servants 
Poor, and afflited ; for it argues short delive- 
(nee from their present evils, as presently af. 
sudden. a Tempest cometh fair weather; 
d Ice seen in their season, signifieth 
= - ic but that the Spirit, when the bodysh.: 
= sleeps; members the cold of the day. But oui 
of time and scasoq, it is only good for plow Iz. 
men; to others not ; for it argues that thicif. © 
business shall go forward coldly, and forbids 
F them to travel. Hails are troubles and heavi-Þ 
dess, and reveal Secrets. Thunder without 
= Lightning to servants trouble and falshood : but. 
* *lghtning without thunder, vain fear, and 
without cause. To fee elementary fire, clean), 
pure and clear, not great nor thick, arc threat- bi 
enings to some nobles, and men of great estates. | 
" 26 TY But ; 


Hit Interpretation of Dreams. 62 


But large, fair and thick, is approach of ene- 
nies, poverty and famine. In what place so- 
ver the fire is, and from what place it comes, 
x it from the north, south, cast or west, from 
jar fide shall the enemies come, and about 
hose regions shall they run; or else there 
hall be famine : but yet it is worse to dream 
hat he Carries the fire. To see in your dream 
orches and burning flames fall from heaven, 
igntfieth that wood-stacks, colonies, ane 
rees shall be burnt: Ic is also great and 
xtreme danger of life to him that dreameth 
t. Lightning without tempest, falling near, 
without touching the body, signifieth change 
bf place; falling be fore a man, forbids tra- 
ling. To be touched and smitten with 
Wightning, fuck a dream is good for those 
hich would net have their sin and poverty 
hidden, for others will reveal them: To 
he rich and mighty men adorned with great 
lignity, as that of a Scepter qr crown of Gold 
It is good; for the fire resembleth the Gold. 
To others, this dream fignifieth loss of Goods, 
Moreover, to those which are unmarried, it 
ignifieth marriage, be they rich or poor; but 
Mt breaketh marriages made, and maketh 
reads enemies; for lightning loosneth, but un- 
tieth not. Those that have children, upon 
bis dream shall, lose them; for the Ie 
Jouched wick lightning, withers, and dan 
or 


64 ART TIMEDORUS. 
both fruit, flower and bud. To dream ra 
lightning, mak eth champions honourable, ani 
 gravccth orators, and all such as would she it 
themsclsves, and make appearance. Also it ol 
good for. him which is law, in case of hoffer 
nour and renown 3 though lofs in cases of possind 
sessions and *houses'; bnt not loss of Land nn 
them which possess it: to those which pretenWut 
to take possession it denies entrance. Al{qQnc 
it signifieth to him which is in a strange count 
try, that he shall return to his own; and to hind | 
which is in his own, that he shall die theres$vil 
Tou must understand it is all one dream, i 
you are only touched on the head, or on thin 
Romach, or to be burned with lightning: bush 
take heed left you dream you are all burneas 
and consumed by the lightning, for it is deat 
to him which dreameth it: Alfs you mul 
know, that is not good to be scorcht witl 


x lightning, being with his face on the earth, offi 


lying on ones back, or being in a ship ; bu 
it is gocd be standing on his feet, or siting in u 


1 royal and majestic state. un 


= :.- Of Houshold Fire. 
=. TO dream you see fire en the hearth, cleasho 
= and little, is good, but much, is ill; Lit: 


and clear, is abundance of goods: Dead fire ii 

poverty, and if there be any one sack in th 

house, it is death. To hold toi ches and fire 
* | | : brand: 5 


e 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 65 
* by night, is good, especially to young 
ks, to whom most often it signifieth love, 
ith pleasure and effect; but to see another 
Wold a torch, is ill to those which would be 
Feret. A burning light in the house, clear 


d clean, is affluence of goods to the poor; to 
Mnmarried persons, marriage; to the sick, health; 


enWut an obscure and troubled light, is heaviness 
\ Ind death by sickness. A light put out, is health 
unÞ the sick, sor soon after one will light again. 
nina lamp of brass is either great goods, or great 


vils, according to the disposition of the light. 
lamp of earth significth least hurt: The one 
nd the other reveal secrets: A lamp seen in a 
hip, is a sign of great joy and OY to 
avigators, 


- a 


Of burning Houses. | LEO 


WT Ouses burning with a clear fire without 
t falling or diminishing, is riches to” the * 
$90" ; and the rich, bigher estate and dignity # 
But to the houses which burn, or fall, or con- 
Yume, are ill to all, hnd signifie death of mas- 
ers, children, servants, parents, or friends; in 
ke sort trees burning before or within t * 
ouse. The door of the house seeming to 
fre, is good to the good wife, and dan 
d him which dreams it. To kindle the | 
Falily in the oven or hearth, is a sign of Ge» 
eration; but for it to go out straight after, 
$ hurt, | * 


 * Much. as it is better to trouble than to by 


„ 


cclightand pastime, = 
0 %% of all forts. 


66 ARTIMEDORUS. 


A Of Dogs and the Chase. 
| * RE hayes and gins, and all fuch Thing 

to enfnare and surprixe beasts, are ill, u 
less to them that feeks servants run away 
and a thing lost, for then it signifieth speed 
recovery. It is better to {it and hold them yc 
self, than to see another hold them in, 2 


troubled. Greyhounds going to the case, an 
good to all, and signifie actions and imploy 
ments ensuing. To such as are accused, ani 
are in suits of Law, they are ill; But rctur 
ing from hunting, they take away fear, ati 

binder a workman. A houfsbold dog signifietl 
Firms, servants and possessions to come. An 
thor man*s do fawning en us, fignifies cra 
and deceit against us by his master. Biting anc 
barking at as, signifie injuries, adverfities and 
oftentimes aches. + Little ladies dogs fignitnn 


Sheep lignificth advancement, and ob 
taining of goods, wherefore it is gol 
to dream you have many of theth, or se 
themof others, and feed them 3 especially wif t. 
those which defire to handle Government and. 
charge of people; and thote which have are 
tained thereto already. It is alto good for Se N 
« | 


phistals} 


ou 


Hit Interpretation of Dreams. 67 
Wisters, pedants, and School- masters. The 
m signifieth the master, or the prince and 
ng. It is good to dream to be lifted on high 
rely, and by plain and easie places; espe- 
ally for orators, attorni-s, proctors, and all 
ole who desire to heap up Gold. and filver 
their labour; goats signifie. no good, but 
e worst to navigaiors, Asses bearing charge. 
Song and obedicnt, are good for friendship 
d company, and fignifie the wife, compani- 
or friend, being not proud above their 
anMate, or fierce, but gentle and very obedient: 
ey are also good in all affairs and enterpri- 
. Mules are good for all works, especially 
Wisbandry ; only they cross weddings or pro- 
ation. If the asscs and mules are hot, or 
ad, and do any hurt, or be savage, it argu- 
nah deceit by some of our own house or sub- 
as: Mules also signifie sickness, as I have 
own by experience : Oxen in labour are good 
Wt all; but in a herd they are trouble, divul» 
tion, and peril. The bull signifieth any great 
rsonags, especially if they threaten or pur- 
you: To mariners it is tempest, and if he 
ound yau, it is hurt and shipwreck by some 
onveniences, which shall fall from the to 
the mast, as I have often experienced, ink 
daily often falls out. Thus much shall Tuf« 
e conceraing domestical and familiar b-asts, 
Now let us speak of wild and savage beats | 
. | 0 


- 


1 


es 4RTIMEDORUS. 


= To sce a gentle, familiar and fawning Lio 


signifieth good and profit by the King to a ma 
of war; by the scnience of the Judges « 
the wrcstler, or fences ; by the magiftrate t 
the mechanick, and by the masier to the {e 
vant: For the Lion represents those personf®®* 

for his force and might; but if he be hot, ar] 
would hurt, it signifieth f. or and sickness, ant 
threatning by such persons, and danger of fire 
To see or have the forchead of a lion, is goof 
for all, and most often the begetting of a ma 
child: The lioness signifieth as the lion, on 
Tess good and Tess hurt, and not by m 
but by women. I have also known by thi 
dream of a lioness fearing or biting rich per 
fonages have fallen into crimes and accusation 

Ihe leopard signifies (both the man and thi 
woman) wicked and deccitful, by reason of the 
diversity of colours; also people of a strang 
ccuntry, sickness, exc-:eding sear, and sore · eye: 
The she-hear figrifi.s a wife, sickness and re 
turn from a ftrange country. The elephan 
seen in a dream, is fear and dang r. I have 
often obierved and known that the Elephant 
affrighting on-, signified sickness; and catciþ 
ing, ani killing one, signified death. I knew 
in Itily a rich and wealthy woman, whic 
dr amt tat she was mounted upon an elephan 
and shortly after died. You must understand 
that every wild beast generally representeth our 

2 enemies 


* 


" | E. Interpretation of Dreams. 69 

[iooflnemics 3 and therefore it is always better 

mi overcome them, than to be overcome 
es them. The wolfe signifieth che year, and a 
e ruel enemy hunting plainly against us. The 
e fer * | 
rsonlaemy, hunting fecretly by surprizing and 
anying, and molt olten, deccit by a woman, 
an The ape signifieth a malefactor and deceiver. 


x sigoifieth the same that the wolfe, and an 


6x The wild boar, signifieth rain and tempest to 


doo ose which travel; and to such as plead, a 
masong adversary; To ploughmen, fierility ; . 
on!$nd to him which marri. th, a rude and angry 
n offife: To ships it signifieth the governance 


thifod- course; and in land journeys, the way 


Sie or hard to hit. In other places it figni- 
ionic, that there are fugitives and deceivers, 
the and perjured persons, fearful and unas- 
tured. One may be judge of every other beast 
nge ccording to the former manner, and by those 


nember, that domestical beasts, which shew 
bemfelves fierce and savage, signifie ill; and 
ontrariwise, cruel and savage beasts, which 
Sn your dream represent themselyes gentle 
ind domestical, signified good. Besides, they 
vn fie excceding profit if they * Pet 
bur language, especially if they say , apy*goo! 

ne Ning. . joy ful; and all which tte Peak, 
„ mmonly falkth out. | 


ou | Of. 


+ 


o whom they appertain. And you must re- 


8 7 ARTIMEDORYS. 


- be corcupted by the enemy of him that drea 


Th 
old 
© 


Of orceping beasts. 
"THE dragon signifies a K ng or a Lord, 

the hw for his length ; also Rich 8 
gold and filver. When one dreams that =o 
comes and gives an attempt, or speaks, it Mau 
nifies great gocds. If the contrary, it sigs HO 
fieth evil: A dragon folded, and wreathe..;, 
and tertifying, "Fenifieth great danger 0 
captivity, 4 f death to the sick, The serpeshut 
Hgnifics sickness and enmity: and if any of 
seem to be governed by him, sickness and aþ, 
mity shall 15 rely hardle him. The asp aned 
and adder signify money and rich wives. 


0401 


| have known by experience, that these ty 


b. afts coming Re fa us, wreathed and wou ih 
together, have been arguments of good, csp 
cially if they bite us. Any beast which off 
dreams that his wife carrieth hid in her boso 
with plcasure and pastime, signifieth she sha 


it: but if she fearful and sad by reason ft 
aforesaid beaft fo carried, she mall be siek, a 
if she be with child, her fruit hall be end; 


s 
07 Hing. 
Eis and all other instruments of flax ii 

catch. fishes, signifie the same which t 

hf and gins in the chase, of which we ha 
spoken before. So a line of sitk or horfe-h 
and ts lignificth enk and 2 
whe 


therefore it is always better t dream you 


jose which exercise an art or trade, which 
Squires sitting by it, as masters, te chers, and 
oal-malsters, for the first cannot fish and do 


olars and auditors, because the fishes are 
Pespute. To ca: ch little Fishes, is heaviness, and 
rofit. Every fish of divers colours, is poison 
the sick, deceit and tr-ason to the whole. 


ments: 10 the sick, gioss fevers and inflam- 
Haiions ; revealing those that would be secret. 
ish which have fcal:s, and which one may 


Wd to every afflicted per son ; for it signifieth 
them abolition and loss of-evils, wherewith 
Ney shall be encompassed. ; 


Of Frogs. 


them in a dream, is good for those which 
e upon the commons. I knew a man who 
amed that he beat with his Ast, and the 
zuckles or join's of his fingers upon frogs and 
so fell out, that his Master gave him autho- 

over all the affairs of his house. So then 
> must think that the pond; repre sents the 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 71 


old them yourself, than that any other hold 
m. To catch much fish together, and very 
g. signisie to all, gain and prefit ; excepft 


Weir Trades, the others shall have foolisn 


ted fish siguꝭ fies to servants and malefactors, 


Will, are good for the sick, captives and poor, 


ROGS are abusers and praters : but to see 


- 
o 
: >» 4 2+ MA 
ws ew —— , oo , anti a 


Houfe 


— 


72 4K 1 K 095 


Houle, the frogs the inhabitants, that the strik}* 
ing of his fingers the commandment. 


Of great Mansters and Fishes of the Sea, 
O fee a great fish in the sca, is good ft 
no man, only the Dolphin excepted z whiz 
promiseth wind from the place from whena 
he cometh; but out of the sea every fish ; 

great monster, is good, for they can hurt « 
more, nor fave themfsclves: And therefore 
besides that, our dream signifi:s that our ene 
mies cannot hurt us: It faith moreover, th 
the wicked shall be punished. Notwithstanc 
ing, the dolphin being seen out of the sea, it 
not good, but signifi-th the death of some of 
our good iriends. | 


J 


7 


of dive. dappe is and cormorants. 
see in a dream, dive dapper, and cor 
3 morants, and: other such like birds of th 
"fea, is peril to mariners, but not death. TS 

|  , Others they signific their Friends, and whore 
geceivers, wicked and perjured Pyrates, whic 
Munt rivers and the sea, And if in dreaming 
He sees these birds, and lose any thing, he sh 

never recover it again, Ducks also, and drake 
| 9 birds of the river, signifie the like. 


Of dead files. 
Te, see or find Fishes dead in the bes N 
not ä for it betokeneth vain hopes 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 73 
but it is better to catch them, or buy them a7 
y way. Allayt is good to eat them drest. 
ind, according to their dressing you must 
doe as followeth. To fee a fish in his Cham 
fa her, it is ill to a master, and to the sick, A Wo- 
nan with child, dreaming that she hath a fish 
Sostcad of a child, according to the Ancients, 
he shall have a dumb child: but as I have 
wn, it signifieth more often that she shall 
ve a dying child, or of lictle life. 
| Of Birdiug or Hunting of Birds 
HE. lime twigs and glew is the return of 
those which are asar off, the recove- 
ig of fugitives, or any lost thing. Ot the 
ets and hays to catch birds in, we muft judge 
of those of wild beasts. | 


a 


Of all sorts of Bird. 
Reat birds are better for the rich than 
the poor, little and tidy, are the con- 
7. To see an cagle flying over a stone, 


aich those which are in fear, it is evil. Also ie 

aifieth return of him which is in à far 
untry. And if his flight be far, and at 
and pleasure, it is good, ard fignfiicth, 
t the busineis shall kave an end, but not fo 
n. An cage flying, and falli: g upon the 
d of him which dreameth, it sigufies his 
ath ; To be mounted upon an eagle, fig- 

ä nificth 


ole which would undertake businets ; ' burt 


= 


* 


HH ARTIMBDORUS. | 


good, for they shall be welcome, and received 


great profit. O'tcntimes it fignifieth. chang- 


ing, hath been found a geod Dream by Ex- 


4 ad threatener : to others it is hindrance of 
= affiirs. The Bird called a Grip, is good forshhe; 
* earthen Potters, Tanner, and Dyers of Lea. 


de Kite Ggnifieth theives and Robbers 3 theshy 
| Grow may sigaifie 
F rhixcf.:) The Raven signifieth hndrance oi 


nE&h'to Kings, Princes, and mighty and 
rich Pefsonages, death: But to the poor it is 


tall rich men, from whom they shall draw 


jag 6n:s Country,” and going into another: 
Nation. The Eagle *threatning, signifieth 
threataing of some great Pet sonage. Bit 
being gentle, or givirg any thing, or speak- 


p=rienc-, The woman which dreams that 
she hath received an Eagle, shall bear a child 
which shail rise (according to his Quality). 
to goods and honour, ' To see a dead Eagle 
is good for a Servant, and him which is in 
fear; for it sign fieth the death of the Master 


ther; but to Physicians and Patien's they are 
evil. Also, they signifie wicked Striplingys, 
and Robbers dwelling without the Town 
and evil in every Thing. The Faulcon and 


the adultress and the 


affairs, an old wife and. Winter. Bats ligh b 
nie nerdy Fo ks, and trouble in vainghn 


- which the J y allo signifieth, - Wild pidge kat. 
ons sign. ie wild and dissolute Women; and 
7 ul. | A. —— 


| th 
camF)-. 


* 


LY 


—_—_— 


* B bp e +2 Dries. 75 | 


Jaume pidgeons signisie honest women and 
TE matrons : especially pleasure in - businesg; 
Hand in. case of friendship, company, and re- 
Concilinion, they are good, because they 
I flock together. Cranes and storks seen in a 
ock, + figoifie that Theives and Enemies 
bY should be Hed from t In winter, bad weather, 
and tempests; ard in summer drought: But 
being seen alone, and a part, they are good 


him which is afar off: they be also good in 
dscase of weddings and procreations, especi⸗ 
y) Bally che ftork : by reason of the aid and 
leFrourishment which her little ones give her. 

The swan signifies a Man musician, and his 
terflmusic ; revealeth secrets, by reason of his 
ol lcolour. Being seen of the sick, it signifierh -* 
forspealth : but it he sing, death. z for he I 
Ka · ings, but near death. L 

143 10 Flies. . => 

2 Ees are good to — and to wel 
a thereby get. profit, to others they -in 
onifie trouble, by reason of the noise they © 
ake ; and wounds, by reason of their sting 3 
Sod lickness, by teason of their honey and 
Max, Fluttering- upon ones head, they are 
ligFhood to him that Would be a thief er cap! 
in an: to others, they fignibe evil, especially 


these flies, and also1to- — is good 
J 


or a Traveller, and fignifie the retura f. 


E before People or Soldiers/ T's shut J 


6 to 


|. 56 4RTIMEDORUS. 
|. to all, only except to Countrymes and 
Plowmen. 3 


NO dream to fil well, is good for all; but 
to be ina tempest upon the River or 8 2, 
is ill, signifieth heavineis and danger. To 
fsiuffer shipwreck, the Ship being overwhelm- 
ed or broken, is most da g:rcus to all, except 
those which are d:taincd by force; for top. 
them it signiñe th relcasing and liberty. It ish 
always best to fail in a great ship, whichslife 
bath charge: Alio it is better to fail by SeaJVir 
than by Lud. To have a mind to sail, andfhor 
and not to be ahle, is hindrance of affairs. Tok 
e from the Land, Ships on the Sea sailing ah 
their easc, is good to all, and signifieth to tra-. 
= vel; or return from travel, or Messengers and 
vers from Sca, Ships going from a Haven tc 

|. Sea, signifie good and flow affairs; but arri 
= ving to the Haven, the contrary. For the art 
© * ficial Haven signisics always our Friends andibr 
B. nt factors ; the Rocks, those whom we lov 
dy coastraiat ; the anchors, surety, but hingh: 
drance of voyages; the Ropes which keep 
the Ship at Land are debts and impediments ] 
the Mast fignific th the Master of the House, of F 

' Galley. To sce any part of the Ship on fir. 
and burn, signifieth danger, lest she break one 

3 se 


chat side, or danger to him which by 
fide of the Ship is meant. 


1 — ＋ 22 ” 


Of 8 
Tre Plow i is good for marriages, procreati- 


on, and affiirs, but it requircth time. 
ut The Yoke is good 
a, fore it is better for them to tee it broken. 
To The Sythe is hurt, for it cuts all, and fign fieth 
m+ the time of halt a year. The Saw fignifies 
-ptisthe wom in and her prof; : The Cutter of he 
tofplow, the Wood, the Fan, and the Sythe, is 
 i$filkhurt, departure and loss. The Cart is the 
ich hie of him that dreams it. To dream to cut 
deaflVines, or recap out of time, fignificth that 
14 your business shall be slacked until such time 


Corn, or like grain, are also hindrance z 
r this is not ready meat. Holes in the 
arth, ridges, or sccret places of the earth, 


de Wite, the Life, and the goods of him 
hich dreams it. Hedges, Pales, Ditches set 


to such as are in fear they hinder 
avelling z but in other aff urs lignifie ad, 
ids, and support in necesfity. 


Of Trees. 
THe Oaks are 


people, and also foes ;- the 

fk Olive- tree is 2 Wie, the Combat, 
incipality, and Liberty z therefore it is good 
see it flourishing well, bearing fair and 
We fruit in Seafon. To beat down Oli | 
# . 3 3 | 's {4 


„yet not to servants, Where- | 


men use to cut Vines, and mow. Sheaves 3 


here grains are sowed, or hidden, signisie 


r limits and confines of inheritarces, are 


Pomgranate Trees, Apple Trees, and Peaspel 


: elms, ashes, and other such like, are god 


2 - ART 1 NU K. 5˙0˙ 9 8. 


is good for all but servants: to gather olive 
on the ground, or tread: upon them, is pai 
and anger. © The bay- tree is a rich and far 
wife; it is also ill success of affairs, because od 
. bitter; but for physicians;- pots anal 
divines it is good for their art: The cb: 
pPress- tree is patience and — Pine tre; c 
ami bodies of fir- trees have reference to Pn 
* and mariners, because that theredor 

Men make ships, and also. rozen to ' otherha 
at. Ggnifieth floth and frar. Orange-treelic 


Trees, must be accounted of, as their Fruit c 
of which we-spake in our first book, in . 
speech of — Pine · trees, black Popla 
| » 
only for soldiers, joyners and. carpenters 
- to others, they are poverty, because that the 
are Trees without fruit. Beech and Mir tief 
trecs are wanton women, and are good for tho 
which would undertake any such business, and 
for the sick : To others they are ro ant 
labour. K | 
| - Of ee Ur bi | 
1Ow-dung, horse-dung, and all other 
4* (except Man's) i is good only to a Plow 
man; to others it is heaviness and hurt. I 
hath been proved by Expetience, that it iv 
t to such as are of mean estate. To seq 

of man's dung is great evil, —_ 
[4 : _— 18 


oY 


Mit Interpretation of Dams. oh 
lively to be / fouled therewith, is most evil. To 
pay bis dung in his chamber, is great sickness 
fir divorce of his wife, or friend, or change of 
ise odging. It is very great danger to dream to 
an ase ones belly in the church, in the market, 
r hot-houle, as shame, hurt or revealing 1 
erets. But to ease ones belly well, with ease, 
nd much, in a privy or chamber pot, is g 
dr all; it is a siga of allegiance, and? da- 
herharge of care and business. I have knowa it 
reeeylso. good to easc ones Telf by the shore, in the 
eaiclds,” paths, rivers and ponds ; and the like 
ruisso dream of a cupboard, - - | * 
t * A x . | | 184 
jan O floods, ponds, fountains and wells. mv; 
a | Ivers having their watets clear and: cleans 
ers gliding gently, - are good for Servants» -- 
hend those which have law: suits, and such as 
rtl vou travel; for they signifie the. Masters, 
hood judges, which do as they will; and ab, 
anisso travellers, because they run daily. Hut if 
aui he River be dirty and violent, it is contrary 
de threatening of Masters and judges, and 
hindrance of Journeys. It is yet worse, if the 
ver seems to carry the Houses and Inheri- 
ow4Jance of him which dreameth it, or himself 
ether; and abundance of evil, if it carry him 
ven to the Sea. It is also il} to be upon che 
seesRiver, whole Waves run against the Prefson, 
cond he cannot get out; for with pain shall} 
111 D 4 ohe 


— 


— 


| 


%% 4RTIMEDORUS. 
one suffer and support the evils that he hath 
hath he never so great a ccurage. Great flood 
are rigorous Judges, angry Masters, presses me 
people, Assemblies, and noise, by reason plc 

the violence and murmuring thereof: It ill 
good to pass them on foot or swiming. Toll pt 
iu im in a River cr Pond, is to fall into grell 
inconvenier ce: It is cv.r beiter. to swinlkpre 
. withour stay io the shc re, than to be asleep ii 
- sfwiming, A clear River running into thilo 
Housc, is the coming of some rich man, by 
whom one shall reap great profit : but a troubledjgV 
and violent River, and removing of move 
Abbes in the House, is the violence of some e vin 
en. A River running out of a rich man nd 
Jouse, bgnifieth that he shall have authorighlw 
. Wh the Town, and be very bountiful and ! 
beral: tothe poor man it is doubt of his Wife a 
or others of the House, which he shall harder l 
rule. To ste other than River- water enter intq of. 
the House troubled ard dirty, is doubt df 7 
fire; but be ing fair and clear it is gain, pol 
sessions, and moncy. In like fort is it to fee inflteyy 
his ground, a House, a Well, which was noch 
| thiere before: also it signifi-th Wife or Chil 
&ren to those which have none, To see a we 
full of Water in the House is good, if it be 
cpen above, and strangets draw out of it h 
for that is the loss ot Wife, Children, -a 
Goods. The Pond being great, — the 
| f . ame ' 


- * 
4 
2 7 
xx 
4 3 
| 92 


. the River doth ;; but that ic signi” 
jth hindrance of travel, but being little of 
nean, is a rich and pleasant Wife, lovin 
pleasures. It is very I co fail in a Pond 
u River, but not wim. Fountains and 
IofSprings, abounding with good water, are 
Pod ro all, especially to the sick and Poor; 
uro uring to them healch and riehes: but dry 
hs clean contrary. 

/ Fens, Mountains, Marshes} Paths, and Woeds, 
b Arshes and Fens are good only to Shep- 
lee hcards, to others they are imprachments. 
ve Mountains, Vall-ys, Woods and Plains, are hea- 


nnd MalefaQors,. and hurt to the rich: It is 
fighhlways better to cross over them, ard not 
h 
A | 
health, and fo on the 2 

x q Law, « and places of Pleading, and of Physicians.” 
: of 2 ces of Pleading, Judges, Attorneys and 
of Proctors, are troub e, anger, expence, and 
e infflevealing of secrets. If the sick man dream 


Im he obtains his sair, he shall come to better 
And ik 
c which is in suit, dreams that he fits in the ' 


hilSstite : if otherw.s-, he shall die. 


ages Seat, he shall. not be overthrown, but 

tiber his advcriary:; Physicians seen in a dream, 

off» him which is at Law, signifie the lame 
Þ Attorneys and Proctor. | 


Hir Interfoerttion of Deane. 


her 


stay there, than to lumber in the way. — 
age, Plain, and casiz paths are fore runners 


[| 
i 
1 


inefs, fears, and troubl-s, stripes to servants © 


#2 4R'TIMED OR Us. 
| «IT 1 Of g estates, and dignities. 9. 44: 4 . 
Jo dream to be a king or emperor, to the 
fiel is death for as the King, so allo 
death is subject to none: To him which is iat! 
Health, it is loss, or separation of Parents and 
friends, for the king hath no companion: to 
2 milefatory it is surprizing, and discovering 
his faulis; for the King is known, and en- 
compassed with his guard: the Scepter, crown 
and habit, or ornament royal, fsignific aþþ 
much. ;Fhezpoor man, which dreams be is 2 
king, shall» do worthy © deeds z whereof he 
all have honour without profit. The servant 
mall be at liberty. It is very good for a Philo- 
10pher, poet or sooth- 
moreifree and royal than a worthy: spirit. Te 
dream to be a captain, to those that are accus-· er 
tomed thereto, i good; to the poor it is 
trouble and defamation 3 to the servant liberty. 
Too be a Ton- clerk, it is to do another man's 
work with pain, . voidiof profit. To the sick it 
Js death. To the scrvant it is good government 
of the houses faith! and authority. To be a 
Mayo or bayliff of the Town, or to have 
charge and government of children and wo- 


Þ mission and power over the living, is good for 

Pnysicians, and - those that are studioas:of the 
+ government af life and health: To others it is 
P=rroublcs and defamation, To give alms and 
—_— general 


— 


fayer,.: for nothing. ised 


men, are troubles and anger. To have a Com- d 


| His Inter pretali on , Dreami. 83 
Þcneral distributions ; to the sick, it is death: 
nd disfipation of goods to the whole, trou- 
le and defamation. To good men being poot; 
t is good, betokening 4. and advancement 
ming to them; so without goods we can- 
ot give such alms. Al so it is good to Players 
d Morrice-dancers,. for it signifieth to them 
onour and praise; when one maketh thet a- 
resaid Alms and distribution, to dream that 

une taketh bis part, is good; but not to take 
a, or receive it, is good to none, bat evident 
befsy signifieth death; for the dead receive no 
int ore. Any dignity which requireth carrying 
gold and purple, is death to the fick, and dil. 
redit to others. To be made a Bishop, i is good 
* only except those which would | be 
To be chief of the house, assembly, ot, 

is 3 is Pain, anger, and oftentimes hurt. 
y. Noy state belonging - to a man, which a 
1's au dreameth she hath, signifieth her 1 | 
_ Und the contrary. ; | 2 g 


mar, of the army, aud eleftion of men at arms. 

Ar and affairs of war, are troubles and 
anger to all, exce pting Captains and 
Idiers, and such as. live by it; for to uch 
s gain. Arms which cover the body =P: 
it surety, as the Buckler, Helmet, Cromer t, an 

h like: Others which one tosseth and bran- 
| th, as the Pike, * Arrow, and Darts, 


signi- 


. _ 2 —_— 


4 Fl 
0 "+. 
o : 10 9 
1 rr. # —— ow + Aww ,, _ 


"te 4 R TIMER DO R Us. 


signifieth debate and (dition. The wood, knik 


or Word, is courage, force, and vertue. The 
buckler and helmet have also referrence to the 
wise, who shill be eicher fair and. rich, or poor 
and ill-favoured, according to the quality of 
the harvest. To chuse men of war, or soldie 
to the batt'e, is death to those which are some 
way fick, and often to old folks : to others, it 
is bofiness and anger, change of place, flight and 
ges. To the idle and poor, it is work and 
t which shall befall them s for the soldi 
1s not idle, nor without praise: To a servan; 
it is — and estimation. 


13 Of fingle-combat. 
Olsgle combat signifieth noise or Law suits 
which r<cf. mble the pains and labour of the 


-* ebmbatants ; The Arms of him which flyeth 


fignifieth to go to law; Sometimes I have 
known that As 


Of the Sun. 


Tages. 
| 1 dream the sun riseth shining and cler 
is good to all, and also setting so, it f 

nifieth gain, operation, prot-Qion, and lber 
to Servants; bu fro su ch as would be secr 

is il}; for os and discovers all, Like 
wile, if it rise towards the East, it relievell 
the sick, after he hath been on, 


dream TIO fore told mary © 


rr 1 2 


His Interpretutùm of Dreams. 85 
fgnifieth that sore eyes shall not make blind 
the patient, and the return of him wh ich 
afar off, Also it is good for him which would 
travel towards the Est ; to others ia all af- 
off fairs it is cross. If the Sun seem to rise in the 
ien South or North, you must judge thus, the 
Sun being dark or bloody, or as it were mur- 
tF muring with anger or heat, is io all, and 
fgnifi-th sereness of eyes, sickneso and childten 
yet hach it been found good 10 them which. 
are in doubt, and which would b-1.cr.t. 
The lun descending upon the Earth, or any 
housc, is a sign of danger by fire; ente ing the 
Chamber, and thrcati:ing is great sickness and 
burning, but if i: speaks or makes any good 
| fign, it is abundance of gocds The Sun 
hd Vanishing away, or hiding and abs:n: mg it- 
self, is il to a'l, except to those that would be 
I i{-cret. Most often it is loss of sight, or death 
of a Child. It is always b. tier to see the Sug 
beams entering the house, than the Sun itself ; 
for the Beams are abundance of goods, the sun. 
abundance of evils, which one cannot suf- 
earl fer, no more than he canendure the light or 
sigh great heat of the Sun near him. The Sun 
per 


giving Or stealing away any thing, is loss a 1 
cre} danger. n we 
. o, the Moon. -.-- 


etl { moon is the wife, nurse, daughter or 7 


— | - 
# 


Aa 8 Bus IG ow — - 


. - 
OL nf . 


L 


6 ARTIMEDORYUS. 


and significs money,. riches, merchemdize and 
raffick, also navigation, the eyes of him 
At Uread s, and the Master, or Mistress, 


And therefore, if the Moon turn her self into 
good and joy, it is good and honour to those. 
hom it repres-nis: And on the contrary 
to fee himself in the Moon, is the son of the 
man, the daughter of the woman that dreams 


it. This dream also is good to exchang-rs, 


usurers, and takers of receipt for victuals. Al- 


so it is good for those which would shew 
themselves and appear: But it discovercth 


the hidden, and puts sick men and mariners, 


in danger of their lives. What good or evil 
the Sun sigoifieth, the same fignification hath 


the Moon allo, but less and more to the wo- sh 


: man than to the man. 
Of the Stars. 
Ce all he Stars clear and fair, is 
for a traveller, and for all business, and 


the Sun or moon. Those Stars are planers which 
are causes of cold fignifie anger and danger: 

| Bur those which cause fair fine calm weather, 

e prosperity and riches. Those which are 
15 cause of the winters shortest day, are change 
into evil; of the summers” longelt day, into 
good or better. Such Stars as vanish and go 
© Out of the Sky, is poverty, and forfaking to 
the rich: For you must imagine that the Sky 


* 


2 for secrets, in which they agree not with bi 


signi-F 


i Interpretation f Dreams. 85 | 
anifieth the house of him that dreams; the 


Sars his goods and posifsions z to the poor this 
eam signifieth death. It is only good for 


em which have attempted some. great 
evils. Whosoever dreameth that the Stars 


zanisheth out of the Sky, his hairs shall fall 
rom his head. Stars falling upon the earth, - 
r yapishing, is loss of parents or friends, great 
r little, accor ing to the quality of the Stais, 
o rob the Stars, is hot good; for it bath fal- 
n out, that after this reMh, the dreamers 
ereof hade committed sacriledge, and sor 
have been apprehended, and punissed, To 

t the Stars also is not good, except to A- 
a Sooth-sayers, to whom it sig- 


Pifieth gain; to others, — To lee the flars 


nder the eaves of the house, is that the house 
hall be fors:ken; consumed or burnt, or that 
he master or the house shall die. The Comets, 

ams, and burning rayes, and other like 
lings, 3 4 in a dream, bgnifie as their nature. 


ri 07 tbe Rain-bew.. | * | 
He Rein- bow on the right hand, is good, 
on the left, ill; and we must judge the 
ght or the left, according to the Sun. And 
what quality socver it/appeareth, it is a 
od sign to any one that is afflicted with po- 


rey, or any one affliction; 1*⁰ it 1 
le time and air. 


of 


> Smoaky, dark or obseure is ill time or anger. 


4 Ppurpol. d to travel, and which were indebted. 


1 | 


h A TIME DON US. 


Of the clouds. 


HITE clouds is Prof perity: Mounting | 
from the earth on bigh, is a Voyage 

| the return of the absent, à d revcaling of ie. = 
e-ers. , Red or irflamcd is ill issue of affairs 


Of the Wind. 
En:le Winds are good; violent are wick · 
ed and evil People:  Froubl. some tem- 
pests of winds, ac pcrils and troubles, ccc 
Of . earthquakes, and gaping of the earth. up 
HE E-rth trembl ng, is a of estats 
and aff es: but oꝑ ning, deep pits, con- 
custons, and tur ings upfide down of the earth 2 
are injorics, death, and loss of 8. Oah 
this dream hath been tri-d good to those which 


To 
of the ladder, the Bp, a case, a mili/tone, a 
Ut Peli, and the cock. 

THE ladder is a fign of travelling, the 
steps are advancement; some fay they 

PF are dagger. A case or frying- ag-pan is hrs, 1nd h 
2 Woman which is given to talk. The Mill- 
sto1e signifies end of great and angry Matters, , 
and a good and loyal Servant. The pestle is 
the Man, the mortar the Wom3n. The cock 
is the Father of the Family, or "ns * of 


the Lodging, 2 


2 SLE 


_— 


"He Interpretation 97 N 
Of Eggs. 


wh ch sell and trade with them, are good; 
To others it is good to have little store of them, 
od signifieth gain; but plenty of them, is 


n arc, Pain, noise or law suits. 


ng 
k 


— 


Of monsters, or - things against nature. 
OU must unde: stand, and hold in gene- 


K- 
M- 
Fcording to the course of Nature, are vain 
jopes o _—_ which shall not fall out. 


* 5 : . Of Books, 


tm | them. To dream to eat them, is good to 
ok chool-masters, and all that make Prefit by 


Lo others | it is sudden death, 
of bie and of shaver. 


hesDArtidges fignifie men and women: But 

k most * Women wi:hout conscience, 
grateful, hard. Snares. are detainigg, im- 
aching, and sickness: To servants, they are 
yalty, honour and authority, from which the 
thankful shall be deposed. To those which 
not married, they are weddings; 


51 shall have. 


F ik 


. 8g 
13 | Gs to Physicians, Painters, and those, 


ral, 1h:t all Monsters and impossibilities z | | 


P OOKS are the life of him that dreams of 


d. Nooks, and which are studiqus for eloquence 


to those 
hich have no Children, they * tnat 


a of 
= 


| 
| 
= 
'T 
| 


V which-hath a wife, to die signifieth separationsþ 


* 
1 
* 
- 


— 


+» of 


i should be a doubt, that she hath beeniifor 
bear them, To be scourged of the Gods, of tag 


Dot good... 


07 Stripes. Kki 
T ; is good to whip and scourge those onh 0 
which are under us, except our wife; faire 


nought : Others bring profit to them which e 


dead, or of our subjects, is not good z but thailiri 
good of them. It is always good to be whip tt 
ped with rods, or with the hand, and siggifi 
profit; but ary leather, reeds, or nN 1 


of Death. 3 
FO drown to be dead, is Wedding to hig 
which is to marry y for death and mary 
rage: ee one another. For the sick tal 
dream they are married, or they celebrate 
their Weddings, is fign of death. For him 


from her, or his companions, friends or parents vi 
for the dead keep not company with the living 
but the contrary, . To him which is at home, 
1 —— he shall go abroad. It is a good 
for Fathers, Pocts, Orators, and Pni lo-? 
Ts; the first shall have Children which 
"Om live, the other shall compose works 
© worthy of memory.” Moreover, I have made 
experience, that this is a good dream fort 
_ those which: have heaviness or fear; for the 
dead have no more fear or heaviness: Also 
ta those which a are in. N for inheritance, and 
V | 8 which , 


———_ 4 
* +, a * 
mg + SH - 
— A 


i FREE f Dpa 91 


hich would buy lands; for the Bei are 
puh ords of the Ea 5. In other Jaw-suits this 
 [offream is not so good. But it healcth the sick, 
eor the dead are sick no more. It is all one 
o dream that you are dead, or thit you are 
thesarried and buried for dead. To dream to be 
Pied quick is not good; for it often figni- 
ub th prison and captivity. B. it good or evil 
What death signifieth, if one dream that he is 
Pied by another Man's hands, that good or 
vil shall come by his means. $77 one dreams 
te kills himfels, he shall have that good or evil 
iahhich death Ggnifiech, by himself. Death by 
sentence of juffice makes burt Goods or Evils 
peater, To be hanged or strangled by ano- 
Per, or by hims:1f, is trouble and anguish : It - 
imsss also change of place and House. To be bur- 
jonflled quick signĩfieth as much as to be scorched 
s;vith lightening, wh-reof we: have spoken be- 
„ore: bur properly to the sick it is 7 figs of 
hea'th, to young Folks, calamities, cnc 
Fence, and be ts of youth. To be crucified, 1s 
vod to those which would go to Sea; and to the 
door; but to the rich, the contrary : To the 
wmarricd it is weddings; to servants liberty 3 C 
dis, also change of place; to be. crucified in 
the Town, is to have such an Estate and office 
the pl. ce requires here one dream be sis. 
o have combat with beasts, is go d tothe 
Ic wy and signifieth Goods, whereby they man 
| nourism 


—— 


Io be carried by a woman, a child, or a pootff 


92 ARTIMEDOR Us. 


.- "nourish th msclves, and entertain 2 Train 
- To the rich it, is, anger and injuries. To my 
ny this hath been a token of sickness : It] 
liberty to servants if they dream they are Kill 
by the Beasts; - 


Of carrying another, or being carried. 
Fes to carry another, is better than to þ 

carried, in as much as it is more honod * 
to give than to take: For he which carrieti 
repre sents him which doth good, or a pleasure; 
and he which is carried, him which receiveth 


55 
h 


anf 


son, is means of profit and supportment. 
is good for a scrvant to be carried by his mas - 
ter, and for the mean man to be carried by the 


rich. 

t the , 4 
O ly to ce tlie dead, without any other? 
2 Accident or-spe:ch, is to be ia the same 
Estate and Affection wherein the aforesaid 


PF; dead Persons were towards us: For if they A 


'  ececing bad when the dead seem to carry 
| -away and take from us apparel, goods, monics 


were our BenefaQors, the dream signifies good 
21 joy to us, and soon the —ͤ— It is ex- 


or victuals ; for it is death to the dreamer, or 

some ot his parents or friends. If the dead give 

us victuals, money or appartl, it is a good 

dream; but to such as they who give none, it ii 

| * Casc. ee amen ich dreamed | 
| that 


e J. eee 71 R 5 My 


$s get. u Friends tcl sick. 


in 
m: 
t i 
le O money and treasure. 


1K kind of coyn is ill. Bot] have tried that 
money of brass and bullion significs © hca- 


Wor dels and angry words; but mony of silver, 


prds and talk of great affairs; of gold, 


re 
h greater. It is also better to dream to have 
* le silver than much; bccause chat one 


Fanot employ great heaps without pain and 


"She treasure be little, the evil shall be little; 
great, the evil great, with anger, heaviness, 


be bad, as well as for the * 
Of Weeping 


any Friend departed, or for any cause, 
is joy and mirth for some good act. And 


ligity and resemblance with the exteriour 


tempests, and from tempests to fair Wea- 


heaviness to joy, and again from joy to 
inen: therefore also to be merry, is a fign 


$] 


ITY wife bling d. ad, made al! the becs 1 4 
is hous-; and th. n ** _ alter many of ; 


Ome ay, that to dream of money, and all 1 


are, To find Treasyre hid in the Earth, if 


death : For they open the Earth for the 


NO weep and grieve, ay BPR it be for 


x without reason ;; for our Spirit hath some: 


ir which environeth it. As therefore Air is 
ways subject to change from fair Weather 


r 3 so it is likely that our spirit wy gael 


TR ARTIMEDORU. 


of heaviness: but the party must have som 
cause of sadness : for to be fad without a caus 
were a sign 28 should be sad for a cause. 0 
| bel 

* Of Tomb. . 


| To have a Sepulchre of Tomb, or mf© 
* build one, is good for a servant, for pr 
fshnall have liberty; and to him that hath ge 00 

ch Id, for he sha!l have one that shall surs® 
vive him: Also it is ofta fign of Marriage 
and getting of lands, It is a good dream i 
general b.th io rich and poor: but graves fal 
Ang. ar fell and ruinated, are the contrary. 


N 


R 07 the dead reviving and Sing again. 


N * 'T He d-ad reviving, are troubles and hurt 
for we must think as if the” thing wer 
indeed, what trouble there would be if th 
dead should revive, which would re-enter inf 
to the fruit on of th-ir goods, and that woulc 
be anger and great loss to those which enjoy 
cd them after their death. The dead dying 
again, signifieth the death of those whic 
bear their name, being their near kindreq; 
and. Affinity, ik they seem to die twice. | 
| tion or mortal bit fgnifieth the sam 
Vith death. In like sort, every beast tha 
dne shall find under the bed, "which. cy | 
| gale to die W „ * 
. $5 ola als ent 


\ 1 
— 5 to. | | X ty 


En Interprotaion' of Dreams 9. 
/ Weadings, © 0 
Eeing that Marriage and D-ath have 
J some Affinity, as che one sig ifi ng the 
ber. I purpose in this place to speak th re- 
. To marry a Ma d, to him which is fick, 
death: It is good for him which would en- 
prize any good business, for he shall have 
od iflue: And he which hopeth for any 
9. d, shall obtain it, for he which marricth, 
ts. some gocd- or dowry by his wife: To 
ers it is trouble or divulgition, | for 
fal thout this mem make no weddi gs. But | 
one takes an old woman, he shall not. 
rlue new, but old Afﬀeirs, not without, 
"Ffofit. If any one seeth his Wife married t | 
other, it is change of Affairs and actions, 
rer else seperation: if the women drea meh! 
thÞ* is married to another than her hoses; "i 
ind, she shall be 2 from him, n :3 
zuldde from dead, as some say. But I have 
und this not always true, but only when 
wife is not with child, or hath no chil- 
Wen, or hath no inheritance to sell, or if; - 
jreche be with child, she shall bear a sor whom 
shall see married; and by. that means 


om 
us 


ume her self, but her Son shall be married A 
tha anather : and she which hath any goods 
ing tell, shall sc Il it, and shall make a Contract 
Covenant, as one doth for masriageeGe.. 


. +4 © * # wh bo 2 1 , 
* * 
* 
4 6 2 
- * 
. * - * . | 
x | _— 
; © 
- 
* 
U 


| . 
_—_ adi. at. ee. 2 n 


/ 


" 


6 ARTIMEDORUS. 


Of the swallow and nizhtingale. 
iE swallow significth no evil, if ff 


1 make no attempt which denounce 


some evil, or-if she appear in no other that 


works, and principally weddings and mi 
» fic, and promiseth a  housewifely wife, 

Houlse-keeper ; for the Swallow liveth anc 
makcth ber nest with us under the fam 
Roof. The nightingale signifieth as th 
swallow, only less good; for he is not (of 

miliar with uus. 

To Fly. 


IO dream to fly a little height from th 

Fo - earth, being upright, is good; for 
much as one is lifted higher than those that ar 
about, him, fo much the greater and mo 
happy shall he be. It were better for hin 

not to be in his own country, for it signifie 
wandring, or not resting, or returning to bi 
Country. To fly with wings, is good gene 
rally for all ; to servants it is liberty, to th 
poor riches; to the rich, office and dignity. Tt 

fly very high from the Earth, and witheu 
wings, is fear and danger; As also to fly ove 
the - houses, and through tle strects, and 
forlorn ways, it is trouble and dition. Tc 
fly into heaven, is for scrvants to ent t int 
3 8 Houses, and especially the _—_ tc 
=> * thok 


\ 


her natural colour. But she signifies T00W:. : 


His Interpretation of Dreams, 97 


hose which would be secret, it is ill; for all 
the world sees the heavens. To fly with 
the birds, is to keep company with strangers, 
md pain and pnnishment to malefactots. It 
$ always good, after having down on high, 
nay descend low, and after that to awake, but 
It is best of all ro fly when one will, and come 
down when one will; for it is a sign of faci- 
lity, and good disposition in affairs. But to 
fly by constraint, or being pursued by men, 
spirits, or beasts, is not good; for they are 
great angers and dangcrs. To fly backwards; is 
Noot ill to those that would fail ; for common- 
ly in a ship which gocth her coursę without 
tempest, the peopl- take their ease, and lie 
backward ; to others it is want of work and 
business ; for tholg which be so, are idle; to the 
ick, it is death. It is very ill to desire to fly and 
cannot; or to fly with the head lowermust, 
and the feet upward.; and in what kind foever 
the sick fly, it is death; for we defend, that 
he souls departing from the body, fly into 
heaven with grcat flight, as little birds do. 
To fly is ill to those which have a trade or 
handicraft, which requireth no removing 
dut ot his p'ace ; it is good for captives. Many 
dy this dream of flying, have become blind, be- 
cause they fear to fall, To fly in a chair or 
bed, or being set in any under prop for the 
better sustaining — is great sickness 

| but 


98 ARTIMEDORUS. WF. 


but it is not fo ill to him that should travel hose 
for it is a Ggn that he should travel with Phi- 
Family, with his Tools and Moveables, in bv 
Cart or Coach, | 100 
Of juch as are worthy to be believed. ny 
T Hose which ina dream tell us any thing ne 
and are worthy to be b-licved, are in the 
first plice sent from God; for to lie is a thingsshin 
that agrees not with God. Next sacrificers, for 
these are pleasing to God, Then Kings and 
Prince, for every thing which ruleth hat 
Power and might of God, After tie m fathers, 
| Mothers; and Masters; for they are as Gods, 
giving -us first our life, and after our form of 
od life. The next Prophets, and amongstspitt 
WV Sen-such as are not given to lying nor deceiJsjeah 
- ving; as Soothsayers, Astrologers, and Interpre. It a 
ters of dreams. Then the dead, for thosesj 
Which lie, do it either for fear, or for hopesss 
*- of good; but the dead neither fear us, nor 
expect any good at our hands. After childre 
old folks and beast are worthy of belief in 
wWrhatsoever they declare unto us in our dreams, 
No others are to be believed, except those bir 
Which live well and solitarily. 
; The conclusion of the Author upon the . 
| .Second Book, 
F peradventure any of those which shall 


Fife had. my books in their hands, — 
| | pose 


- 
: 


", His Interpretation of Dreams. 99 


el;Sose that I have put any thing in either book, 
hihhich, I have not known by experience, he 
n aSbvscth himself : but having seen and under- 
tood the Preface of this book, he shall know 
yy purpose and intent. Moreover if any 
ng ne ha:h an opinion contrary to any speech 
they me recited, b:cause it shall have (as I 
ingffthink) some probability z; he muft know for 
forflnswer, that 1 know already that he will 
andfind whereof to spcak, and that which shall 
athsse very likely; which I my self can do a so: 
ers ut I seek not to complain, as those” which 
ds, ek applause and favour at theatres, or which- 
| offfet their words to sale. But always I cal tog 


gstimness for me, Experience and the rule . qi 


alon : wherefore 1 have set down nothws 
tall, but what I have gained (with mus 


cel 
We 
of; 
pe 
nor 
rend interpretation of dreams. But I muft 
 inequest one little favour of the reader, that 
ns. e would neither add nor diminish any 
ose hing of my prefent work. If any one thinks 
hat he can add, he may as weil make ano- 
der book : If he thinks any thing superfluous, 
t him use only that which he shall and 
alllod, leaving the rest for others. 


The End of the Second Boot. 


vel and industty) by experience. For 1 4 
we done no other thing day and night, but 
dictate and spent my spirit, in the juugment 


' ART1MEDORUS 


/ 


Nis Exposition of - 7+ 


| | WY , | 
D R E AM g 
= | : The Third "car I N 
ere Rs * Pla 
Of play at Dice and Tables. C 


© Pream to play at Dice or Tables ra, 
1 is noise and debate for money. It ithic 
always good to win: To the sick i 


is ill, if one gives over in play. The Dice off 
Tables simply seen in a- Dream, is sediton anc 
bir 
litt. 


2 


= -noise': but loss of them, is end of noise an 
sedition, To fee a child play at dice or ta 
bpbles, and courtiers, is not ill: To a perte 

mam, it is ill to play at Dice, except he hop. - 
' for some succession by the death of another ba 


for the dice are made of the bones of t 


Dead. 6 
O Theft, Sacriledge and Lying. 
dream that one steals, is not good, ex 
A cept to him which would deceive anc 
ther. By how much richer, and safely guardis0;| 
ed the thing is which one dreams he steals, us 
much greater is the danger to the Dreamerser; 
for it is likely the dream subjects the Dreamessiac 


Ihe 
ph! 


Cy 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 301 

the same pain that the Law doth Thieves, 

o commit Sacril-dge in a Dream, is most ill 
8 0 all, except to the sacrificers and prophets; 

or by custom they reccive and divide the 
it fruits of Oblations, and are always nou- 
shed by their Gods, and take not all openly, 
o tell a Nie in a d. cam, is not good, cxcept in 
Payers and Jesters which practice it. It is less 
i] to lie to strangers, than to h s own Coun- 
rymen ; for it signifieth great Mi:torcunes : 
ra, though one dream to lie to his fricads in 
| ungs of vcry imall importance. 


Of 2Quails and Cocks. 

N from sea: they cross Affiaities, friend- 
hips and. marriages, for they signify Noise, se- 
littons, and death to the sick, if they cross the 
ka, They are also cross to voyages; for they 
Monify ambushes and treafons, because they 
re spied when they fly, and often fall. into. 
he hands of Fowlers, and Hunters. Cocks 
which fight, are also noise and trouble. 

| Of. Ants. WES 


it argues Hurt, or a dang-rous Voyage. 
Other ants, which are diligent and industri- 


fertility : for where no grain is there you can 
F _ no Ants. They are allo good for such 


E 3 AS... 


Uails are Messengers. bringing ill News | 


O see, Ants with Wings, is not good; * "i 


us, are good for Plowmen ; ; for they Ggnify. - 


| Qefire . 


- Which wil! assault and discredit the dream: 
to taverns it significs that their wine shall 


108 AR TIMEDORUS. 

as live upon the common good, and ray 
profit by many; and to the sick when the 
come near the body; for they are called in 
dustr.ous , and ccaie not to labour, Wh. ch i 
proper to such as live: But when they rang! 
about the body of the patients, it is deat 


b:cause they are the daughters of the earth 
and cold and black. 


Of Lice and Long Worms. 
O dream to have some. little quar.tity o T 
lice, ard find them upon his bedy off * 


gown, and kill them, signifies that one shal pli 


be dclivered from care and heaviness. Bu 
to have a great quantity, is long sickness, capti ( 


vit orgreat poverty, for in such cafes lice 
| : abound, "And if one cast them all away, i; 


argues hope to be delivered of all evils. Tec 
vomit worms by his mouth, or upon his seat 


1s to know his enemies and familiar Wrongers 


and to overcome them. \ 
Of Flies, Hornets, and little Worms which af, 
engendred in the Fi:fþ. i 


B worms are care and anger, and often- 
times displeasure, which one shall have 
by his wife and Familiars. Hornets are p-op'e 


spoiland sower ; for such great flies love and 


Of 


ö. Elis Interpretation of Dreams. 103 


A Of Beating and Hatred. 8 

F'otes with his friends or strangers, is- 
not good: the lick shall be in danger of 

nving and lofs of sense. To fight with great 

Ipersonages, as Kings, Princes and Majestrates, 

s very bad. To dream to hate, or to be ha- 

ted, whither of fiiends or ene mys, is ill: for 

one may have need of all the world. | 

» Of Slaughter. p 

T © see people sacrificed or killed, is good; 

for it is a sign that our business is accom- 


rang 


- 


Mplished, or near the end. 
the Crocodile and the Cat. 
Rocodiles signifie Pyrates, or robbers by 
sea, or murderers and wicked persons, 
In any sort like the Crocodiles, The cat sig- 
vifieth the adulterer or harlot t. 
| Of Crutches. | 
T Alking upon crutches, to malefaQtors- 
, it is prison, Chains, and Stocks; to- 
others sickne ls, or a vagabond- like life. 
To wall uron the Sea. 
Or to wa k upon the fea, to him which 
would travel, as aiso to a servant, and-: 
bim which would take a wife is good, the one 
shall enjoy his wife, and the other shall have his 
a master at hs own pleasure. It is also good for 
him which hith a law suit, for the sea repre 
0; V E 4 senteth 


fäusion of the waves. 


14 ARTIMEDORUS. 
presenteth the judge, which handles fo 


well and others ill: and the Woman by rea- hol 
fon of the Moistness, and the Lord by ReasonfÞ0% 
love of a-delightfal Woman. To a woman it is 

dissolute life of her body; for the sea is like t. 
shew, but jn the end she brings many to evil. F 
This dream is good to all those which Jovessgov 
govern any public matter; for they shall havesAn 
great honour and profit: For the sea is likesigec 


of the might. To a young man this Dream ier 
an harlot, because it hath a fair appearance and 

and make profit opon the people, and whichsand 

2 multitude, by reason of the disorder and con- Ithe 


, < 
. Of Sickness. by | 

2 T O be sick, is good only to those which 

are in Captivity or great Poverty; for 

fsickness makes active and lean, and diminish- 
eth the body. To others it is great idleness 
and want of work: It is the same case t 
dream that you visit a sick man, which you 
know signifieth that the event shall happen 
to him, not to the Dreamer: For we holdÞ* 
that our friends, Neighbours and Familiars, 
are the fantasies and images that repres-nt 
things that are to befall us. Especially, I have 
observed, that all th: good and evil things 
which the soul would signify to us betimes, 
and of greater importance, she brings and re- 
8 7 * presenteth 


— 


7 


His Interpretation" of Dreams.” rd 
nesenteth them in our dyn person : But 
things which she denounced more“ 


} 
ea. wr 


sorowly and of less appearance, she represents' = 


n idem by some other. 


ry To make statues and images of Mn n. 


e tt 

ndl POR io make images of Men, whether of 
vil. Earth, or any other Matter, is good for 
ovelgovernats of children ; for they shall govern 


ichind instruct them with honour and profit, : 


zvelAnd to - those who have no children, it is 
Ike good also z for they shall have some very like 


on-Ichemselves. 


To be fastened in a Cart, and carried in it. 
ch PoR to be tied in a Cart to draw as an 
for Horse or Ox, is sickness, servitude, and 
h- pain, to every body, how rich or mighty so- 
eszherer he be. To be carried in his Cart or 
Coach, or drawn by men, is to have Might 
dullnd Authority over many, and to have Chil- 
enfidren of good behaviour. As for Travellers it 
14s to have surety with slownels, 


go be Appardlledill PU yy 4 
ve Tf one be ill favouredly attired, it is ill to al! 
os and signifies abundance of mocking and 

8. outing, with ill -iflue of Affairs: This 15 : 
4s | 
199 _ 


s only good for flouters and ore. 


N ARTIMEDORUS. 


TJ᷑0o write with the left band 
ys with the left hand, is to make 


some secret circamvention, to cunnys 


catch, deceive, or defame any one.. 


Of a Father-in-law, and Mether-in-law, 
O dream to fee a father-in-law, or mo- 
ther-in-law, dead or alive, is ill, especi- 
oY using violence or threatning 3 using 
gentle speech and good entertainment, are vain 
1 and deceits. Sometimes they signifie 


er 3 the house; the father and mo- 
5 * strangers 


0 our Predecessors. 


ele, fignifi: care, which shall turn to 
* or eyil, according to the order and 
S Once of our dream. Our, succeflors, 
be ing but children, is 5 and Pain; be- 
* ing greater, signifie support. - WWE. 

4£ „ Rat and Wa, 

e rat ignifieth the servant; it is good 
l to fe many, playing and sporting. But 
the weasel significth a bad and wicked wife, 
or law, or death, or gain; according to 
her doings, goings or comings. 


Of Dirt. 


F you dream of Dirt, it Ggnifierh koh 
or difhonour, 


: 


ages! for the natural father and mo- 


4 icceflors, as grand fathers and other an- 


a 


. Eber vrorim of DFeams. 6771 1 


1 Of the Bason. 
Ke dream of a bason, signifieth a good 
ny F maid : to drink or eat therein, 18. Woe 

of the servant: to see himself in the bason -, 
as in the glass, is to haye cen by the 
10» servant. | 


ci OF the Image or resemblance. 
ng A Statute or Image ' significth children, 
zin and the will and affection of the 
fie dreamer. An Image of solid matter, and, 4 
10- not Totten, is better than the painted, or 
10-£ whe of the earth, wax, and such like. i bat 

which befals the image, shull | befall Me... 

chfldren and affairs of the dreamer. 


"Of the Midwife, | 
Midwife seen in à dream, is a vali] 
4 X' ing of secrets, and hurt: It is death to 
the sick ; for. she always pulleth out that 
which is contzined from her which con- 
taineth it, and layeth it on the ground: 29 
to those which are kept by force, it is li- 
od berty: ofen seen of her which is not with | 
ut child, signifieth sickness to her. 


„1 , Of Thorns and Slings. ney 
Tings and thorns, are gri-fs, , impeach» . I 
ment, care and heaviness; to many 


ey have signified love, and also _ injuries 
ls by wicked Persons. AL * 


o | N *& 


— 


* 
OTIS F 
. 


% 


- THE Debt and the Creditor representeth 


a scar, is an end and issue of evils, a 


- owe a life to nature our universal Mother, 


ditor. Sometimes the Creditor represents the 


1 


108 ARTIMEDORUS. 


Of a Chain. 
A Chain is a Wife, detaining all success of F 
Affairs, and hindrance. l 


- Of Comfort. 
15 you dream you have comfort of any 


one, to the rich and, happy it is mishap 
- and Injury; co the poor and afflicted, aid and 


Comfort. 
Of a Wound, , 


SOR to dream to be wounded in the sto- I. 
mach'or heart, to young folks, signifies 
love ; to old, griefs and heaviness. In the 
Þ- of the right hand, is Debt and War ; 
by reason of the sign that is made thereby : 
But new skin recovered in the Wound, called 


Of debt, the creditor, and the birer. 


life: Wherefore to the sick the Cre- 
ditor urging and constraining, is great 
Danger; and receiving, is Death. For we 


which she makes us restore and pay. The 
Creditor dying, is end of heaviness. The 
renant or sojaurner, * signifies as the Cre-. 


TI Oz TY . 1355 8. 8 


Daughter, which demands, her voy to 
Of 


2 


Fi Interpretation of Dream. 109 
Ty be a Fuol or a Druntard. F 
of YI} OR to dream to be a fool, is good to 


them which would und-rtake any busi- 


ness : for fools and madmen do that which 
ny cometh into their brain: It is also 
.* Flor Marshals. and Sheriffs which would 
nd Fave Authority over the- People; for they 

shall have great Repute and Honour. It is 

also good for those which would govern 
- Hand teach children; for Childten do -wil- 
„ Flingly follow Fools: It is also good for the 
poor; for they shall have Goods; for Fools 
e 
z 


catch of all sides and all hands: To the 
ick it is health; for Folly makes Men go 
4 and come, not sleep and rest. But to dream 
"to be drunk, is very bad to all; for it sig- 
nifieth great Folly : It is only good to such 
ware in fear; for the drunken fear or doubt 

nothing. Of Letters sent. 
see Letters, and that which is written 


position to things therein contained: But to 
ke them only, and not the contents, is 

news; for in every Letter, there is health, 
Good morrow, God have you in his Keeping, 
2 and such like. 

plants and trees coming Mt of the body. 


of our Body is death, or Cutting to 
| kim 


within, fignifieth that one shall have dis- 4 


por to dream that any Plant cometh out Y 


Fab R T T E DO RUS. 


him; Which is meant by that part fror 
whence the plant ariseth. 


Of the Scab, Leproste, and ob. 
Cabs, leprosie, and i:ch,..are signs of he 


nour and riches to the p2or:::to the ric 


and mighty, they are offices and dignities : | | 
is also revealing. of jecrets. But to fee anothe 
leprous and scabby, is anger and care; for a 
ugly and ill-favoured things, make sad the 
| Apirit which look on them. i 

2 To cast stones, or to be Sand, 

| © east stones at any one, is to assail-wi 


words and Injuries : But. to be- stonec pc 


and hurt with stoncs, is to bear and suffel 


- Ofcentimes ic is a journey or flight; fer be 
Which is assailed with stones, must flye. Wher 
I there. are many which calt stones, this drea 
is good for him which hopeth for money, ot 

| Profs or commodity by many. 


1 N Grasbep. a 

55 S or crickets, signifie musicians 

= To suen as are in necessity, they-neithet 

ig nifie friends nor support, but only word: 

| _ talk of their affairs. To such as are i 
fear, they are threats without essects: To the 

* gs they fignthe thirst and death, _ 

To suffer. as another. 


0 be in pain and suffering as cen 
to be accellary and partaker of his offence 


= : Ihyarics; for stones represent injuries speeches; 


x His Taterpretation of Dreams. 14% | 
and pain; for \sicknesses and imperfections ll 
of the body, have reference to the passions 
and affectons of the soul, | 
| Of Dung. ' 
Vor to see dung, is good for those which 
live upon the common people, and rea 
gains by them, and to such as are of bale 5 
kt ite: it is also good for those which have 
charge of public affairs. It is good for the 
poor to slcep on a dunghil ; for he shall. get 
and heap up store of money : To the rich, 
It iS'publi:- estate, office, hanoũr; for the com. 
mon people always carry and cast their su- 
perflutties on the dunghil. To be fouled with 
dung by any friend, is enmity with him, and 
mjury by bim; but by any stranger, it is 
great hurt to come. „ 

3 Of Prayers and requests. 5 
ern and requests of alms, of all beg- 

gars, poor. and miscrable, are care and 
anger to those which dream thereof z for 
dne requesteth of another without affection, 
and none that are afflicted have reason and 
consideration, by reason whereof they are 
Wimportunate, and cause trouble and hin- 
drance: and if they receive money for Wl 
ams, it iis a sign of great peril and hurt; 
and death to the dreamer, or to some 
friend of his; poor folks or beggars en- 
ring into. a house, and carrying away 


„fick ; for it is their calling to divide and {cl 


12 ARTIMEDORUS. 


any thing. whether they steal it, or it be beat 
given them, fignify very great Adversity. th 
Of. the Key. 

A KEY feen in a Dream, to him which 
would marry, signifieth a good and 
handsome Wife, or a good Maid. It is cross 
to a Traveller; for it signifieth he shall be d 
t back and hindered, and not received: Ii Ide 
is good for such as would take in hand ora 
ehe other M.n's Businesses, . 


07 4 Cock. 
see a Cock in the House, is good to 
those which would marry z for Marri- 
ages are not made without a Cock : It is also 
geod for the Poor; for they shall have Goods 
and Ability to keep a good and long Table: 
To the lick it is inflammation, heat and tears : 
it is also revealing of secrets; for a Cock's ap- 
* is white, and is seen of many. 
Of Chess playing. 

O dream that you play at Chess, is gain 

by lying and Deceit, To see another 
5 Play, is, that he shall sustain Loss by Craft. 


| B Of Butchers. 


Ucchers, which knock down, * kill cut, 
signify danger, and hurt, and Death to the 


and divide beast, and after sell them, 


dead beasts : To such as are doubtful it is 
great 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 113 
reater doubt: To captives and bondsmen, it 
the issue of their evils. * 
O an inn-keeper. ent 4 
N inn-keeper, which Keeps a public 
inn, signifi th death to the sick; he 
bert fore represcnteth death, because like 
death, so he entertaineth all persons: to 
thers it is trouble and heaviness, danger and 
avel. The inn significtn the same as the 
n-Keeper. «., 


To be kept and detained. 
O bz kept and d.tain:d by any one, is 
imprachment of affairs, and continu» 

ot sickness to the sick. Notwithstand- 
ng, to those which are very low, and near 
ie end, it is recovery of health, and conti- 
wance therein: for the keeping represents - 
fe, which shall be prolonged 3 but delive- 
ace, dissolution and loss, is quite contrary, 
nd death. To enter into prison. ard captivity 
f bonds, either willingly,. or by force, is 
great si-knels, or anger. Serjcancs and hangs 
nen, are cap.ivity, hcaviness, and revealing - 
if secrets to malefactors. | 
Of holy evens, jeys, and banquets, 
| made by night. _— 
He" Evens and festivals by night, mM 
are good for such as would marry, 
ir make marrlages, and such as seek com- 
| pany 


- fects: tothe rich and wealthy, they are trou 
ble and devulg tion 


* ** | -< . 

au ARTIMEDORUs. 
pany. and affinity: to the poor they are: 
lign of goods: to the sad and featful, erq fie 
of heaviness and fear; for nne wa: ch Wil pal 
lingly at night in dancing, good cheer, an 
mirth, but to those wh ch ar: joyful; | ' Whore 
tmasters ard harl ts, it is revealing of they 


_ SE Of places of assembly. 
IE Pl of plea, the market, theatres, high 
By ways, and great places in a town and 
suburbs, and. churches, are troubles and con 
fusions, by reason of che mu'ticudes of people 
Which resort the aforelaid places. A market 
filled with goods and folks, is good for thos 
' Which traffick : bur an empty market the 
$ N 5 


| of Statues. | 
Razen statues being very big, seen mor 
ing in a dream, ae ricnes and revenues 
but excceding great oaes, and moving like 
monsters, are great terror and perils, because 
one cannot sce them without frighting. Sta 
tues also represent magistrates and governours 


of the town; and in this case, whatsoever 


they. shall. do or lay, mall basal! the 
121 personages. | 
Of the Mele. 
He mole fignitierh a man blind by, incon- 
venience, and labour in vain ; and (ig 


i” nifieth Yr! 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 115 
ed fieth also, that he which would be secrets _ 
vil hall be disclosed by himself. 

5 -- Of nigbi birds. | | 
He madge:howlet, the owl, the bittern, 
the bat, and all other night-birds, 'crofs 
ny ent: rpr Ze or advancement of Affaics; but 
ke away fear and tcrrors: Only the bat 
good to women with child; for she lays 
yt eggs as other Birds do, but little ones, . 
ind bears milk, wherewith . she nourishes 
her young. If these birds are scen in a Dream 
Mio enter a house to dwell there, it signifieth 
that this, house shall be desolate and forsaken: of 
lie inhaitants. He which goeth by Sea or 
Fland, and sees in his dream any of | these 


hands of thieves. } 


Of the clock. © 5/4324 

A Clock significs act ions, operations, 

motions, attempts, and surprizing in 

ny nessary things, If a clock fall or break, 

t is il and great danger, especially. to the 

Wick. It is ever better to count the hours be- 
fore noon, than after, 


The conclusion of th author upox. the 
third Book 
Ehold then, all which wanted, or which 
was not fit to be put in the two former ³ 
books, sufficiently (as I purpose) are com- 
rife in the third book, And for this "0M 


0 


rde, he shall fall into a great tempest, or 9s. | | | 


I though it good to make this litt e book 


116 ARTIMEDORUS. WP 
apart, Jest I should have omitted those thing e 
therein contained; and by that means some * 
other might take occasion either to write 8 
nather book of th s sabject, or add to mine Ne 
But you must know, that there is nothing ae 
more tedious or difficult, than to undcr.tayd 
the div. rsity. composition, a d mixture of dreams 
and to prescrib: gen ral rules for all kind off 
dreams; f.eing that sometimes, nay often, 
one may tee the fame dream,; and at the 
fame time of the night or day, things con- 
trary, and which have no resembl:nce or 
agreement: but it is impessible, that thing 
signified by the self. same dreams, fuld dif- 
fer or be repugnant amongst themselves, it so 
be that dreams foret:l matters of import”: 
which shall happen. For as in all other" 
things there is an order and dependance ; I. 
fo allo it is very likely, that the same falls To 
out in dreams, When therefore one shall se lai 
in his dream things both god and evil, than hte 
he mutt thizk with himself, which were the the 
first, and last: for in worldly affairs, some- I 
times even the greatest occasion of hope have for 
had ill issue; and on the conrrary the great- th 
est cccafions of doubt and fear, have had 
good iflue 3 and tor great ev ls which one © 
hath expected, one hath found but small; Im 
| and forvlittle hope, ef good one hach found be 
. | none 


one at all. So that mixed and compounded - 


Mily  understcod” or expourded; which is 
great grief to many. But for-my part, I 
ue wilt methodically, and in the best and 
Fasiest order that I could, that every one 
night take an easi curse in the exposition 
dreams. And as school-masters, he they 
e taugbt heir children the knowledge nd 
ropcriy of any « ne letter in particular, after- 
ards t aching them how they must use 
hem all tog ther ; in like sort would I pre- 
cribe certain wut le®and easie rules, and join 
ooffik:m to that whch hath been said in my 
re former books, to the end that they may 


„euch as have h d. xpcrience, and long practice, 
erffihis will be very easie, and fhall suffice to 
e; Int. ut them in all things what they signifie. 


laid, that the head sigrifies' the father of 
him that dreamed it ; and in the second that 
the lion 
and in the chapter of death, that it is good 
ve for poor folks to dream that they die. When 
therefore any poor man (having his father 
nich) dreams that a lion comes to devour or 
tear in pie ces his head, and the fame poor 
man seems to remain dead, and without a 
head in his dream, tis likely that his — 


His Interpretation of Dreams, 117 


Fireams are very doubtful, and cannot be e- 


solbe the better Icarned and ur derstood. For to 'F 


sro the purpose then. In cur first book we | | 


sigmifieth the king; or sickness: 1 


118 ARTIMEDORUS. 


3 books, not to accuse or blame them before 


shall die, and he shall be his heir, and by this 
means shall forego the faintness of his poverÞ - 
ty, and become rich, seeing that he hat 
neither father nor poverty that shall keep him 5 
down longer. For in this dream the head 
representeth the father; the loss of the head 
the death of the father; the lion, the sicknel 
whereot his father shall die. And death tc 
the poor man is change of estate, shewing 
that by riches. his povert shall be expelled 
In; such sort one must jead himsclf to the in 6 
terpretation of all divers and mingled dreams 
ef any whole chapter of speech, gathering te 
gether, and making one only exposition, like 
as ont medicine is made of many herbs and 


roots. To which intent, I desire all courteX 
ous; readers; who are desirous to peruse mj 


£ they have diligently read and understood them 
* 7 am confident, and dare affirm with 
great security, that my books will. not be re 
jected by the learned and judicious readers 
nor by those who are either Sow diligent 
or. Mandl ne readers, | 


The End of the Third Book, 


12 TIME BO RUS |} 


lis Exposition of Rog 
DPR E AM S. 


F 9 — 1 a tt. th. tio * 2 


pH The Fourth Book. 


— —Y tt. 


. 8 P 
-_ Wn 


F the variety and diversity if dreams. 

* dreams, some are spectulative, that 
is to say, which come (if one may so 
Mek) in the fashion of the spirit, when 
te. body refteth : others are allegorical z 
nent is to say, which snewe:h under cther things 
or ose things which they would signifie: and 
n We more hard to interpret, chicfly, because 
itude is in doubt whether thi-gs will fall out 
re. che spirit hath represented them, or in some 
er manner understood by them. Where- 
re farst of all we mult understand, that the 
ect of spectulative dreams will happen, or 
n aster the dream: but the effect of al- 
gorical dreams appears some time after, ei- 
er long or short, as a day or two. But it 
re fondness for any man to think, that 
anstrous and impossible things should hap- 
n as the dreamer hath seen them. And we 


75 
N 


most know, and note, that artificers „Meer 


120 ARTIMEDORU. 


present their art: as the attorney which 
dreamed. that another attorney was + fic 
was a Jong time. without clients; the smit|yor 
which drcamed that he saw a smith, whe 
"was his neighbour carried to the grave ot 
afterwards left his own shop, and the tou 
wherein he dwelt. But to speak of anothe 
Apollonides, a c:yrurgcon, drramed that 
| fencing he had wounded many, and had pre: 
practice: for the intent of fenceis is 
wound, but not to kill; the like doth thi 
the chyrurg on. The sick man dreaming 
saw bread ready to be set into the ov 
although the fruit of Ceres are ever gooc 
yet notwithstanding, it signified to him 
great fever to come; because those loave 
were to be heated and baked in the oven, 
to him which would marry, or whigh 

would get affinity or company, it is bett 
to dream. of the vine and wine, than 
corn or bariey, and for him which desife 

to advance himsclf, it is better to give th: 
to take any good, if he take ic not oft 
more apparent personages. 


; Of Buff. 
£ tes dream you fee of all forts of stul 
| which you can tie, truss, or carry, esp 
cially in dossers, panniers, or a 8 
— er 


— 


- CO TEC CC ICY CRRxs 


1 


n Interpretation of rides,” 127 


> those which would m 
ther affinity: but it is cross to those which 
ould make any voyages, run, or flie, or 


vesshose which would surpriz- —_— and ule 
oy deceit or cunoing, | 


To meet folks. | 

O dream to meet or see folks, whether 
men or women, if they be such as love 
Sis, or we love them, which are willing to 
b or have done us any 
d defire to hurt us, but wish us well, be they 


eher alive or dead, the dream is good: for 
which the spirit sees or meets with, the 

ody sleeping, they are kinds and images of 
to come; amongst which our friends 
bg ric good, and or enemies the contrary 


i 8 . 


0 „ ill. 
ni 
0 F any man, re become. 
hath been rich, dreams that he- hath such 


first eftate and FBI 


im in his house, or 


1n the de puties, tenants, or 


tul 
'p 


F 


poor after he 


nds and possesfions | as he had before, and 
e same folk which he had before, are with 


armers, which he had in hi- prosperity upon 
is lands 3 his dream is good, for it fignfis 
at his goed fortune will reiurn. And on the 
ontrary, if a man now rich, dreams that he 
4 es or hath those things which he had Wo: 


her chains, carcanets, &c. fignifie good 
, or make any ' 


ich fear to be surprized ; always excepting | 


good, and have had | 


| "208 ARTIMEDORUS. 


he was. poor ; it foretelleth bim, that he shal! * 
return to his, poverty, and that he shall have * 


I tuck. 

To judge that be. whom -we „ think i is our enemy 
is our friend, and the contrary., | _ 
Pi of © recreation, whither loved © 

those that seen them in their sleep, or 
which love them, and honour them, or bear 
them good will, although they have not: great 
-familiarity, and acquaintance together, fg. 
nie property and days,” of recreation to 
come: and on the contrary, those which 
being seen in a dream, hate them which see 
them, although they are ignorant of their 
mier and ivin, signihe ill. So then, when 
8 see in a dream any personage which you 
el to be your friend, and the day after 

you have no prosperity, or good luck, then you 
may judge that he bears you no good: will, 
but that he is a dissembler: and on the con- 
trary, if you see any 3 whom Aer suppose 
to be your enemy, and yet the day after 


you have good luck, 3 think wy it is 


wrong for to judge him your enemy, and 

you ought. not to bear either an ill eye, or an 

ill heart towards him. 

To see or meet tradesmen, or - any pleasant maid 

dat; or woman. 

"A. Ny. tradesmen which one dreams that 

he fees or meets, hath the same effect 
ich , | + which 


7. 


ths" Interpretation of Dreams. 1234 WM 
aiich their Art; bath; and, the Gme ef 
VI is it to ce their; Shops. And yet you myst 
excopt..a whore: For to dream that you. see. * 
mor. meet one, is a sign of Joy,-and; ng ill 
Taream; but to sce the brothel house — 
off e acteth her whoredom, is to dream of hea- 
orfiviness and iil-luck, because it is a : publick 
ar place, fall of trouble. „ 


g- Te o see littie Children, or young men (to wit) of 
to mean age, er od folks. _ 4 
ch . little children, it is better to 
dream you see Boys chan girls; and 
ir yet both import care, because for little ones 
en we, must care. Litile children, or others of 
Ju middle age, scen in a dteam, are better than 
er Ito fee old folks: and Lo if the dreamer were 


Ju n any usiness to brivg witne ss or to become 
il, surety, and defireth that men should give 
n- {| credit to his words or writings, it were better 
se | for him to see folks of a ripe age, or old; pro- 
[vided always, that those old folks do | nothing 

is in dotage, or upon an old grudge. 


Of trees and e. coming forth 7 or Tate 
C8 , alsc % of Iiving creatures, 81 


AMvorett low trees and plants, the Oak, 


such ; in like fort, thc Elephant, the Raven | 
the | Hart, and their like, gpifie good. or evil 
to come, slowly, vording, to. che dispo ition Wl 
Io and | 


the Olive, the Cypress-tree, and other 


"124 ARTIMEDORUS. 

aud different quality wherein. one secs them. || 
But the trees and plants which grow quickly, 
as the vine and the peach tree; and among 
beasts, the Hog, and such like, fignifie on the 
contrary fide, eicher good or evil, which shall 
— quickly happen. 6 ad fed t 


D Walls, foundatoins, and old trees. 
. ALL sound and firm things, as walls, foun- 
_* © dations, and cid trees, and fluff of iron, 
and the I aditope, ate significations of surety 
to those that are in doubt and fear. 
e O Cbariots. 
NHariots which are not in usc, as to dream 
to guide a Chariot drawn or carried by 
Wolves, Leopards, D:gs, or such like beastyy 
is good only to'those that fear great enemies; 
| because such beasts when they are ser be- 
_ tween a drought-tree, are subject to the gui- 
der. To dream to be carried therein by 
men, is good only to those which would 
command, aud be obcycd z to others, it is 
discred:t and hurt. - 
Fa.. jy 
T. is good ho but such as use it; to 
1 others, it is a sign to be bad abased,. because 
flatterers are less and baser of courage than 
- -those which use it not. To dream to be 
. pleasant, and eafily endure to be flattered, is 
not good, especially if. the flatterer be one 


of 


* 


His Interpretaion of Dreams 125 
n. of our familiars 4 for it r to be We Y 
73 f trayed by him. | 
* To be fold. r 
11 Or to dream to be set to sale (as ey! 
were wont in old time to fell their 

servants, and thay do at this day amongst 
heathen nations) is good to those which wi 

to change their prelant estate and quality; as 
„ {9 those which are kept in poverty and fer- 
„ {| vitude : but to the rich, and the fick, and 
JI those which are placed in honour and autho- 
rity, it is ill: and after this dream it hath 
fel} out, that many have been taken and 


sold. 
To Buy. 
To dream to buy all sorts of things which 
| one useth, is good. To buy that which 


Is only for victual and relicf, is good for the K 
af poor. But to the rich and wealthy, it * 'Þ 
/ (Xpence and great Charge. : 1 
* i To Get. 


| dream to get and heap up Oe and 

N fair houshold-stuff, — well⸗ 
„ and much, or any more than we | 
had b. fore, is good; but not most excell-nt, 
above our estate and quality; for this would 
be without reason, * would signifi: much 
hurt. F 3 s T vt 


k 


"M0 


"126 ART HH ο 


Of poverty. -- 
4 . to be in necessity Ae 
fignifieth some good to one; and yet 


* th i briggs no good; but signifcth cross 
fortune to those wh ch ike co W of 
their Tongue and fair Speech, | ke 


of things which.one dreams to 2 little char 
7 * beyond their age. 

| 0 dream of any Thing to befal little 
Cahildteg, Which is not prop r to their age, 
18 nat go. 3.48 to die am that. men chile ron, 
have bcards and gray haits, and that little 
wenches should be married and have children; 


Ib. 


which signifioth to them death at hand. And 


yet to dre am that little Children, speak well, 
is 
omen io speak. But as for other, Things 
Popaing beyond their age, in hole Which 
Ar not very itkle children, it wis declared 
ia the first book, in the Chaprer-of Altzration 
and change. Dreams which are of the 
Generation of children, or of wed. tings; foretel 
that dor ehidreh being in a far country, shall 
returo; 'cfprefatly the wife and children, if 
| by chance any one hath took them from 
us: If one dreams ta plough the earth, my 


fow {red therein, it lignificch the same. 


118 
1 | 2 Bos, 


That 


. 


gocd ; b<cuule iis proper both to Men and F* 


Y, | | oftentimes the ftenifier of the same thing. ns 


whereupon a Woman dr-aming that her 


of Eyes were fore, found her children fick : And 
znother dreaming that her children were sick) 


had after fore eyes. . ee, 


A LL vomiting, whether of blood, meat, A 
or fl-gm, to poor folks, if they dream, it 1 


sign fi tu profit, and to the rich hut; for the 
first can lose nothirg till they have it; bat 


lofe them. 
To see or have of ten the same dream. 


nights oc after another, is a sign that 


n great Affeckion to any thing, we cannot 
© Fbut think and speak thereof. But if the 
ame Dreams are sern with long space of 
Ieme between them, they do not always sig- 


if nie the same thing, but divers, accordiag to 
uche change of Time and affairs, either 


4 more or Jefs : Taough many have dreamed 


the same: Dream, it will not signifie to all 


Jake, but rather diversly, according to 
t || the divers eltate aud quality of the folks, and 
. ö 3 


et THE eyes signifie and represent children, 


le che others having goods already, shall come to 


Jour spir.t' doth ad monish and foretell us 
affectionately the self same thing worthy: if 
to be th-ught upon: For when we have 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 127 | 
iar, wbich is fignified by any one thing,” is also | 


NO see often the fame Dreams, and many | | 


— þ . 


1 


* perspicuous piace of all his Face. Whefe- 


- © which one useth to put th:rein: As tuns 


14128 ARTIME D O R US. 
their different affairs. A certain Perfum@ 
-  Oreamed that he had lost his Nose, and he 

| lost his Merchandize, and fold no more; the 

Jos of his nose signisying his Perfumes. A long 
time after, being no Perfumer, he dreamed 
the fame dream, that he had no nose, and 
he was afterwards accused for Falshood, and 
fl d out of his Country; for it is an unscemly 
thing to lack a N-se, which is the most 


upon Virgil 1 ith, Et truncus in bonesto vulnere 
nares, The same Perfumer being fick upon a 
time after, dr.amed agun that he had no 
Nose, and he dicd ; for dead men's heads have 
no noles. S» that the self.same dream in 
th self fame Man, sigu ifi d diversly threeff the 
sev: ral Times: First, lofs of his Merchandize : co 
S. condly, loss of his Honour: And thirdly,f] no 
loss of his lite. 
J Of vessels and instruments.” 

TD V.ry vess i or inftroment, figaificth the tie 
E, Arcor Trade whezein it is ut. d, or that e 


_ fignifie wine or oyl, heaps of corn and barley, 
or such like thirg, somewhat near or equi- 


valent to what thereto it is applied: The 7 


to is and instruments in this sense fignifie St 
Friends, Children, Parents. Victual and Pro- UC 
| vision, fignifics the Master of the House 15 — 
AE ors, | N er 


| | 


| His Interpretation of Dream. 129 
Coffer and Cabinets,” the Wives and the Ste- 
uiring à charge 


rds. 
or conduct of some men , war, Oreamt 
nd] that being called of one, he went out of the 
nd} House wherein he was, and having gone 
ly down two stair, he thought that he 
t which called him, re: ch:d him a Crown of © 
e- Olives, such as the Roman Kaighis used ro: ⁵⁶ 
re wear in their pomp : After which Dream he 
aff was very joyful, and all that were of his com- 
a0 pany were in hopes that by this Dream he 
ould have his request; but he had not; and WW 
inf the reason thereof was, because he received not 
ex] the Crown in going up the stairs, but in 
e: coming down; for to ascend fignifieth Ho- | . 
| 


, nour, to descend, the Contrary. Notwith- 
standing, this Dream fignified another 


thing to him, to wit, that he should marry $ 

and espouse a Maid; fot the crown was of 
gel tied Branches. Wherefore he which ex- : 
at | poundeth Dreams, must not rest in one thi 
is only, but he must und.rstand all the dispo- 
fition and derivation of them, For those 
which judge of this Dream only. by the 
Crown, without regarding the descent of the i 
Stairs, were all deceived in their - Exgecta» if 


tion. 


» sr 

F 

of N 
N 4 £ 

— : : 1 


e . N B * U . 


2 his Ip 
Tr LL" those which are of one Partntaze 
el pecially children, being re presented by 
=: — having gor doing any thing; fignifie 
that something shall be done, or fall out, com- 
ing near the said things, to whomsoever of his 
Kin it happen. A man dreamt that his 
beer was crook-backt, and the sister of 
the dreamer died; and not without Cause ; 


Of parentage. | 


for he dreamed, that fich:a near Kinsman” was flkni 


not well: shortly after which his sister part 


Sa 


Of things which emempass. 


Al those things which encompass us 
or receive us, have the fame conside- 
- ration: As one dreamt that he was a 
relled in a gown of wood; new he failed, nt 
his failing or voyage was hindered. for the 
vn of wood hindering him, represented 
the Ship. Another dreamt his Gown was!“ 
cut into small Pieces, and his houfe fell down. 
Another dreamt he had lost the Roof of his 
House, and he loft his Cloaths. A mariner 
dreamt he saw a wall break, and the pieces 
and sides of the Ship were broken. And 
yet all such things may have reference to 
the body. And therefore not without Cause, 
one which dreamt that his Gown was broken 
and tor, Was worded in the body, and i 0 
— the 
3 se | 


e His Interpre retation of Dreams. © 131 


the same places where he dreamed his gown 


vas torn 3 and as the gown shewed it self to Y 


, Ide the cause of the sou] : In like fort servants 
y E(belide, other things which they may signi- 
ie ne) represent the bodies of their masters: 
Wherefore there was one who dreamt he 
aw his Servant sick, and was sick himself of 
Fever; and the Body is the Servitor of the 
dul, which seeth the dream. Another dreamt 
he had a Horse Foot, and was afterwards J. 
mnighted 3 for as his Feet bare him, in like 
sort the horse should carry him. He which 
 Ureams the King will give him something 


that there shall be some Sentence given, or 
. {Word spoken, which shall redound to the 
1 Profit of the Dreamer. 


Of imper feli or half finished Works. 

22 dream that Works are only half 

done, signifieth evil Success of Affaire, 
Jad it were better not to begn them. Ciléx 
making a request to the King to have the 
succe ssion of his brother, dreamt that he shore 
sheep to the middle of her body; and taking 
great deal of the fleece, awaked, dreaming 
it he could not obtain to sheer the reft® 
After which: dream, he expected to obtain 
the Moiety of his brother's Inheritance; but 


n len the contrary, he neither obtained it all 
je Inor any Part thereof, o O 


out of his Mouth, must thus interpret it, 


132 ARTIMEDORUS. 
| Of Tun. 
*T 


O dream to sce Towns whereto one ref] 
sorcs, is better than to see strange Towns 
especially if they be Towns of his on. coun 
try, and those wherein one hath had good 

fortune and . prosperity z and above all, iti 

to see them well peopled, and filled 

-with inhabitants, goods and merchandize 

by which things one may know the Honou 

- +» and Riches of the Towns. Parents allo are 
fignified by the Towns were we make ou 

relidence. As for example, a man dream 

that his Country and place where he wal 

born, was fallen down and ruinated by ar 


Earthquake; and his Father was conde Intec 
to death, and exceuted. 


If it be pefsle at the same Time to have good af 
5 bad dreams. 
As may dream both good and bat 
dreams in one and the same night: Na 
more, in the self-fame dream one may see 
both good and bad things, which the Inter 'p 
preter must separate in Judgement. And it i 
no marvel, fince the life "and affairs of one 
1 icular man is such; that is to say, mingle 
| +, ordinarily with good and evil, and in th 
siame time one may do and suffer both good 
andevil. Neither Tank we be always contents tt 
with one only issue of our Dream, beecauses ti 
3 | 8 | 


46 n , ; . | 
H Interpretation of Dreams. 133 
it hath not always the like effect; wherein 
Antipater, an interpretcr of dreams, often 
deceives himself-: for when any one dreams |! 
that he embraced iron, it fig ifieth that he | 
should be imprisoned, and ive among irons. | 
The good Aatipater to another which hath 
the like dream. will interpret that at 
eq a particular combat in a close ficld, he fhall 
e be condemned; or he shall keep a fencing- 
uy school, and live as it were among, and by 
IF iron; to wit, by the «exercise and art of 
uy fencing, where one doth nothing but han- % 
die daggers and swords of iron: tv whom # 
a" notwirhstanding this fall not out, but he had 
Us a memb-r cut of. Whercfore we must not | 
always rest at one _ l pars or effect that 
hapneth (for it were to d al with beasts, or as 
fidlers that can play bur one tune) but we 
must be ingenious to devise every Day divers 
things; and they must not in all points be 
divers, but somewhat alike : For our Spirit 
J and Nature are fertile, and recreate and 
sport themselves in variety. 


„ That our brethren do fignifie our Enemies. 
R brethren have the same fignification 
as our enemies, as touching the effect 

ind event of dreams: and our enemies, on 
the other fide, have like eff. ct with our bre 
cy thren. And not without reason, because our 
_ 3 brethren 


** 
Ti 
1 
Mi 
14 
J. 
ti; 
= 2 
14 


% 


* 


334 AN T IM E DON US. 


- - brethren bring vs nothing when they are er a 
born, but diminisn our inheritance and 
' Buccefligh, asd are the cause that those things i 
which ald be all our own, are divided in- hot 
to many parts between them and us. Timo-Not. 
crates dreamt that he buried, or - cause to be er. 
ne, one of his brothers departed ; and a Wa 
little afi ter one of his adversaries or Enemies 
died. And the death of our brethren fignifi- 
eth not only loss of our Enemies; but also de- N 
| liverance, or acquittance from some "loss or 
hurt which attended us; and ' whereof we 
Rood in fear: 1 it happened to Diocles the 
grammarian, who sustained no loss of Money, 
- Whicreof he stood in doubt and was afraid, 
because he Pong before, that he fa his bro- 
ther dead. 


of 2 nnn, reviving, and; mounting to 


| beaven. . x. 
Wes to see, nor to eat such meat as one 

ems is prepared for the feasts of the 

dead, is not good to dream. Neither in like 

sott to dream that you make such a frast for 
yout parents or friends; for it signifieth and 
froretelleth to the sick his own dcath, and to 
dim which is in health, the death of some fa- 
miliar friend of his. Fo dream to dye, and 
asterwards to revive, is not ill, but fignificth Þ 


— Such things! as one hath custom to of- 


fer 


B Hiterpretadun vf Dreams. 135 
re er and present in oblation for the Deceased, ho | 
1d shot a good Dream, cither to offes them, or 


83 pke of them; for it signifieth * x 
nG.. - 
11 


!1- Wo "the cCreamrr, ar tb lome of h is Parks 
2- Motwichstanding to take Sat, gold 
ter, apparel and vessels from the * of the 
cad, whether it be al:ogether, or at divers 
ges is a good dream, and a sign of profit. 
But to dream he mounts to heaven, for him 
which is stck-is death; in like sort to be in 
great tranquility, rest ad happincss. 
; Within what Time dreams comm. | 
LL. things which are wont to have a 
certain determined time, and are. seen 
In a dream, must be referred to that Time: 
And other thi gs which have no cert.in nor 
determinate time, to that time which their 
effects will shew. And we must judge ot the 
ime. far or near, according to the circum» 
nces of the Dream: For he were à Fool, 
at would refer to à year the effect of a 
Man' 's dream, which is constitutedↄ either in 
great pain, great hope, or great Fear. And 
re must know, that the things which a Man 
urea ms to see afar off (as it were about Hea- 
ren) have their effects more slow, by rea- 
son of long distance. - Morcover we must not 
Ie ignorant, that good or evil Dreams bga fie 
to the yu or little, 2 or Isser ban o 
evil. 1 81 
: Toe End of the fourth book. 


* Man dreamed that he drank Muostarc i 
. A so well stampt, and so clear, that i 


- was all changed into Blood: (a dream ve ou 


Certain Examples of Dreams, with their Effe 


""ARTIMEDORUS 
His Exposition of RS 


D R E A M $ﬆ 


d 11 
he | 
ser 
hug 
He | 


— 


The Ff al Book. © 


11 ENCE — 
"ou 


_ 
t 


which followed. 


was potable: It fell out that ond 
d ard coined a certain Accusation i 
cale of a crime of Ma „ Where 
wien he was fo well charged, and se at 
"tained to the quick, that he received Sen 
tence of Death, and was executed by JusticeFÞ 
Another dreamt, that the Water ef the Ri 
ver Xanthus, which is near Troy the Great 


ry fearful and marvellous :) What then fel 
_ out? He cast blood at d vers times for te 
Years together, ard dyed thereof, By whic 
appears, that great Rivers stay not, but dq he 
continue and hold out their Course. A man FC 
-dreamt that his Cushion or feather bed wah 
full of corn - instead of feathers : He had n 
"0 oy never — had any child, anden 

that 


" El Interpretation of Dream. 137 
eee and bare him a son. A- 
ther dreamt he lighted a candle, at the 
oon, and he — blind: For he dreamt 
thing impossible ; Besides the moon hath 
o light of her own. A woman dreamt that 
he saw within the moon three images, or 
semblances like herself : She bare three 
hughters, which within a month died 4 for 


saw his image or representation in - the 
noon,” and he made long voyages, wandering | 
his way. and that way a long time: For the 
votinual change of the moon signified that 
z should often change his place and habi- 
45 A man dreamt his privy members were 
pf massy i iron ; and he had afterwards a son, 
whom he was lain ; for iron by its own 
2 consumes it felt. A man dreamt an O- 
ve - trret came out Bf his head; and he fol: 
wed the study of philosophy, with great con- 
ag . and got everlasting knowledge and ho- 
: For this is a tree always green and 


hom he loved above all the rest, was chan- 
kd into a torch or flame; and he lost his 
| oF and was led and guided by that ser- 
Want. A servant dreamt he 2 a star fall 


| m Haves, and another come out of the 
. _ ww . 


8 


N 


he moon hath a months life. A man dreamnt 


bod, and by all dedicated 10 the Goddels , 
inerva, reputed the Goddess of Wisdom, 
certain man greamt that his servant ' | 


238 ARTIMED O'RS S. 
_- earth and, fly op to Heaven; his xhiste 
died, and his masters fon rofe up in his ni; 
sters place.” Abother having his sister ri 
and fick, dreamt that before her door gre 


u fig-trec, srom whence he guhered fevel 


black figs, and eat them: Hs sister deccasct 
seven days after, and made him her heir. 


man dreamt he had caft his skin, and'relf 
- - hewed.- it as a scrpent; and the day after h 
- = died + For the soul which must leave the bossk 


Ay, rep resents fuch like visions to it in 
= Urtam. A other dreamt tnat his fache 
drew his filter, being married, from he 
husband; and gie her in marriage to aF 


ther, and he died soon after; for his fathef 


represented Gd the Creator, Heavenly Fe 
ther, of our fo''ls, his fister r pr. sented th 


soul of him that dreamt it, which sister beso 
- . Tg sepuared from her spouse, and giving th 
another, seemed to fay that she should-b. sh 


parated from her body, and should live 3 
converse elsewhere 3; fiznityi:g that the sou 
of 'those Which dic, do nothing but charg 
their place. A man dreamt that he waggre: 
with-child, and that he was delivered of tw 


black daughters; and he lost bo h his «yeh 
in the-sight of them. For his two eye: ic; 


thit covered his eyes, fell down. A son be 

ing far from his country, dreamt that his ow 
mother bare him again; he returned into hi 

(7315.71 | - 1 


owl 


: | 


2 E, Titer phetativn of Drinks. 139 


n country, found his mother fi k, and 
3 made her heir by her death and will. 
is dream fign/fied as much to bim, to wir, 
t by lis mothers means he should come 
Yom poverty to riches, One dreamed thawhe 
his bread steep d in boney, and he there- 


on gave his mind to the study of philosb- 


y. a d theieupon got wisdom, honour, and 
pods : The honey there fore by its sweetne s, 
znified the sweetness of wisdom, and the 
ead wea'th... Another dreamt that from hs 
o mach there came cars of corn, and that 
te was ene which pluckt them out: He 
nad two suns. which on after him died. 
% dreaining on a time, that by mischance 
slipped into a pit of water, whereupon 

chywäch the small of big Ig Was ternal 


So white marole, and after a while de- 


sed of a dropsie: Who fees: not by this 


bin example, that recourse of waterish 
mours to the weakest pirt, had made a 
rtain coldnefs and st ffness in the place, 
ich the party felt more easily in sleep, for 
rers reasons which before have been d 

req. Another dreaming that he swam 
inst" a bloody stream, was cured of a plu- 
e. And her dreaming that he app:ared all 
fire like Hercules's furies upon a stag); fell 
at very day into a burning ague. Ode drcam- 


So over night, before he fhould run at olym- = 


pus, 


* 
— 


0 
— "- 
+ SF - 


* 


12 — 
— 


. 
— ——?— a — — — — 
——— — — —ũ—— IC — — - 
. 4 : 0 4 
> 


24 ARTIMEDORUS. 
pus, that he was an eagle ; met with an 


terpeter, who concluded hereupon, | 
cause an eagle was the prince and lead 
of all birds, he should prevail: Anoth 
took not fo great hold upon the quality a 
kind of the bird, which shews a courage 
attempt ; as of his place in coming aster : 
the flock : Which declares a kind of heaz 
metal, with want of agi ih. 
' The End of the Fifth Book of 


4 
he 
MW: 
y 
: 


id 


tc 


f } ARTIMEDORUS. 2 
: s 4 ＋ « 4 | | 

| AN EPITOMY I. 
r | 


| PAL ERIUS MAXIMUS 
4 | And others, Concerning yf 


5 = EA M F 


6 the 8 Augustus and Calphurnia th 
| A 8 Artorus, physiciin to the Empero ble 
"ob Augustus, lay in his bed, the night ben 
fore the armies of the Romans (nameP 
ly, the Host of Augustus and Mark Anthon 
on the one party, and the Bands of Brutus ir 
and Cassius on the other) were to fight the 
battle i in the FOOT Fields; Pallas — 
tec 


4 5 = 4 4 
i 5 1 
mn 8 N 5 | | . 
- 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 141 
herfelf to this jaid physician, command- 
him to tell Augustus, that although he 
s very sick, he should not fail, hut be pre- 
vt at the battle. Which Augustus under- 
ding, he left his tent (being carried in 
ter, though he could not fight for the vic- 
. Prescnily the Soldiers of Brutus's ar- 
surprized his pavilion. And al hough Au- 
tus had resolved not to stir out of his tent, 
the reason of his sickness ; nevertheless by 
admonition of his physician, by this means 
saved his life; For the folders of Brutus 
ned chiefly at his tent, supposing to have 
Ind him there. Bit because this emperor 
vs Wisc, subtie, and adviscd in all his acti- 
„ the example of his adopted father and 
SedeccfTor Julius being yet fresh in his mind, 
rswaded him to obey the dream of his 
hysician : For he well knew, that Calphur- 
a, the wife of Julius Cæsar, had seen - 
her flcep the night before he was sain, 
it he lay wounded in her arms and bosom 
Ich many wounds; by reason of which hor- 
ble dream, she intreated him not to be 
n the day fallowing at the- court. But he 
willing to give ear to a womans dream, 
Fought rather to go to, the senate, and 
in parliament 3 where he was put to death; 
ing miserably wounded with more than 


- 
e * 


Ee 


enty wounds. Likewise a soldier dream. | | 


W 


* 

A 

3 
"4 

- 1 

-£ 

. 
:- 


5m ed thar Julius Ceaser told him, that Octayi 


e c 


- should: win the battle against the Philippiaugega! 


if he catried fometing about him that Mit 
was "used to wear: Upon this dream Odq ith 
vius worte bis ring, and so both then ane tt 
alterwards got the victory. | {eto 
"18.2640 10 213; 1: * * e 
Of Publius Decius, and Manlius Torquatusse a. 
8 Consuls f Rome. 

He vision which appeared in sleep all i C 
f the same night, to Publius Decius, an 


Manlius Torquatus, was of great admirationfuri 


wiyg soever should first seem to stoop: unde 


of che, one army, their captain, should“ t 


and manifest iffue, For then when these twHor| 
consuls pitched a field near the hill Vesyyhm 
us, v2. When the Latines left the fide of tie 
Romans ; to each of these two consuls sleep. . 
ing, appeared a man, and told, them, - tha l 


slain ; and of the other a great. companshge 
should: be discomfited : But the chief of thStrt 
host-that fhould assail the troops of the enqgþd 
mies, and vow to suffer death for the": felliffe \ 


they should have the victory. Hearing thi 


news, and all waking from their sleep, the. 
consuls, made a covenant together, that whassoo 


ay 


the burden of the battle, the captain of thasid 


band so discomfited, should lay down his 1 
for hs country. And aithough neither the 
one nor the other teared; this adventure, yt 
7 | | ws art 


* 


ers 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 143 
je Chance fell pon Decius; for, his troops 
pan to be out of heart; which he seeing, 
ast h mself in the middl. of his enemies . 
ith his word in his hand, and was flain. 
v the Romans had the triumphant and desired 
tory againli the Latines, by the death of 

e of. the chicf -, captains, follow. "S up 
eam. 


a 
a 


tu 


| if 


an 


„ Accia. ; 

cia being wich child of the emperor Octa» 

vius, dreamed that her bowels were 
urid vp to Heaven, and shewed over all he 
ord-. And aft:rwards her son Octavius be- 
me a famous empcror, renowned over, all 
le - world. 
Ep ; Of Cicero. 
hi 1 Uuy being banisned Rome by * cohs. 
spiracy of his enemics, went to a vil-, 
ange; and in his sleep seemed walking by de- 
hrt places, to meet with Marius, then consul, 
nd his troops; who demanded of him, "why | 
was so s{;d; And the cause why he haunt - 
hi those. d-sarts, and was so transported ind 
eh unknown way? And. after he had under- 
hood the many injuries which Tully had un- 
2 


# *» 


Poor: he took him by the right hand, 
gave charge to the principal of his. offi, 
Fr 4 to lead him to his chappel; telling him 
thile should there hear some good news of the 
ye storing of his estate. Wejurh fell out in like ; 
th mnner + . 


2 = 5 7 


4 
| 


- 144 ARTIMEDORUS. 
1 
| 


5 Bd. 


had caused to be built, the Senators fat 


$ thing thereof remained ; shewing therebi w 
his childrens fortunes. For Ecclinus the“ elf lis 


manner: For in that Chappel which Maris 


council concerning the return of Cicero 


And it was concluded that he should returldre 


sase and found, without any charge or dishqnet 


nour. | afte 
2-5 Of Caius Cracchus. dre 
AS Caius Cracchus flept, he dreamed Haft. 
he saw his brother Tiberius, telling hiqwa 


that he should be killed, as himself had bee tar 
_ beforez many heard that he made account qa 

this dream, especially before he was mad 
Tribune of the people, in which office he 


see 
hit 
received his death, agreeable to his brothers. |ki 
. C Ecclinus. ö thi 
Cclinus, a Roman, dreamed the first nighl ca 


after his marriage, that Rome was scateq ia 


- , on a hill that grew higher and higher, untq ri 


an exceeding great h:ght, and afterward}sa 
shrunk away like melted snow, so that nos cc 


deft son won Verona and other Cities; ang th 
Elber ick the younger brother was as victori 
ous : Bnt afterward Ecclinus was taken Pri 
soncr, and fo died; and Alberick having sec” 
six sons slain, his wife - and two daughter Al 


 _ burned, himself also died : Their wholSt 


stock, like the aforesaid hill being utterly'v 
_ diffolyved and extinguished. HAD 
aer . ; 8 


2 


Of His Interpretation of Dreams. 145 
arid / Arthur Rous. 
t HERE being a prize to be play'd at 
ro Syracula, Arthur Rous, a Roman knight, ⁵ 
turjfdreamed the night before, that a carrier of 
ishqnets or a fisher should kill him. The day 
after he was at the combat, and told his 
dream to the defendants, It fell presently 
| Hafter, that near the place where this Arthur 
hiqwas, they came to bring in the two comba- # 
deeftants, one whereof carried for his devise 
it da Fish upen a Hook. When Arthur had 
ad seen the face of this Fish ; he said unto  Þ 
ref him, I dreamed to night that you sheold 
Skill me. And so he would have departed 
thence, doubting some wicked aitemp, be- 
igh| cause of his dream. But the combatants giv- 
ate jag him thei words of affurance, he car- 
intq ried the hazard of his death: For in the 
ard same place the Fish vanquished the other 
nos combatant, and thinking o run him trough 
eb with his sword, the blow glanced aside, and 
"el lighted on poor Arthur, who miscrably in 
and this case tried the effect of his dream. N 
ori O Hannibal of Carthage. - 


Pri Annibal sleeping had such a Vision, that 
sect} ©” he seemed. to see a fair young maid, like 
terf an angel, which was, sent unto him from 
xl Heaven to conduct him to assail Ialy. After 
rl which turning himself, he saw a great Serpent, 
which by force and violence broke all that he 

8 G + encountered 


o 

2 

5 1 
- = 


* ” — 


his heart that he should die by this means, before th; 


146 ARTIMEDORUS. 
encountered; and after him came Lightning an 
'Tempestuous' Rain, which darkned tne day. The 


Hannibal being affrighted; demanded of this fair Mai, bi 
what marvellous Vision this was, and what it signified 


2 
„ 


And the young Maid answered him, thou feestt 4 
ruin of Italy 3 wherefore say not a word, and lea # 


the rest to the destinies I need not here declare wh: 
evils Hannibal did in Italy, following this dream. h 
| Cf Alexander the Great. N 
: How well was Alexander King of Macidon 
admonisned in his fleep, that he should tag þ 
bettet guard of his life, if fortune would have sufterefÞ] 20 
him to bave used this counsel to avoid this danger 5 
For certainly be knew by his dream, before he fe 
the effect, what the hand of Cassander should be ve 
nemous and mortal to him, and he was perswaded i 


ever he saw him. Always after that dream, whens: 
ever Caflander came into his court, and presente J 
_ himse'f to him, he remembred when he looked upc 
him, that his was that perniciods face which he ha 
seen in his sleep, Notwithstanding, knowing th 
he was the son of Antipater, he drove all fear and su 
picion away by his courage; ever repeating Gree 
Verse, which saith, that men must not have reg: 
of dreams; although notwithstanding all that, t 
poy son was then prepared to kill him: And Mea hol 
That be died by the hand of the same Cassander. 
; 3 Of the Poet Simonides. 2 
i T HE destinies were more favourable to the Pc 
1 Simonides, than to that great Monarch Ales 
ander, who advertised and counselled him from abov 
being asleep ; and after his awakening, he took hi 
self td this consideration. For assoon as the Sh 
© wherein he was, was come to the Haven, and they. 


His Interpretation ”f Dreams. - 1 


= found the Corps of a dead man without burial ; he 
took compassion on the Corps, and caused hini to be 
buried. The nrght following he dreamed that he 
saw him whom he had buried, fore warning him that 
the day after he shou“ n t go to Sea: Whereupon he 
stayedwat home on the Land, and his fellows (which 

„J would needs put to Sea) were the same day all cast 
n away by a great Tempest that arose at sea; wherefore 
he was very glad, for having had so much credit to 
the dream in case of life, more than to a poor Ship. 
Afterward acknowledging this benefit, he made his 
Benefactor immortal by his poetry, building him a 
better sepulcher, and which might make him remain 
longer. in mens memory, than that which he had built 
for him among the sands of the Sea, in a desolate and 
unknown place. 


Of Policrates's Daughter, | 
T HE Daughter of Policrate Samius, the Tyrant, 
r that her father hanging on high, was by 
Jupiter washed, ny by the Sun anointed, Afterward þ 
being overcome b Oretes, he was hanged on a Gib- 
bet, washed by the rain, anointed by the Sun which 


melted his hs 3 so that he seem ed thereby to be 
anointed. 


Of King Crce(us. 

TH. dream which at the first exceedinly a f ehted X 
the Soul of King Croesus, and always after — = 

him very fearful and doubtful, was exceeding, mar- 
vellous, and of great force and efficacy: For of two 
- sons which he had, the lustier, which was best en- 
lie riched with perfection of Body, and which was td 
©F® have the Crown after his father, he dreamed that be 
was killed with a sword : Wherefore to hinder (and 
85 if it might be) to divert this ill-luck, the good father 
hell ceased not to give or, by no means possible, This 


© TS. _ 


» 


1343 ARTIMEDORVUS. 
young prince, called. Atys, being before accustome@rov 
to go to War, was by his father constrained to kee im 
the House. He had a chamber furnished with all In Hun 
struments of war, which his father made be kep lit 
from him : He had his guard well armed and weaponet 
with ftaves, all which his father commanded not te 
Come near him. And notwithstanding all, the destinie 
made way for sorrow and grief : For when a great and 
wild ' Boar wasted the goods of that Country up 
Mount Olympus, and flew many of the Inhabitant 
thereof; behold the countrymen assembled themselve 
together, and made recourse unto the King Croesus 
Whereupon Atys so long perswaded his father, tha 
he was sent ; and his father consented somuch the ra 
ther, because the boar had no Iron about him, bu 
only teeth. But what followed? Behold, as one ra 
fierce and hot after boar to kill him (see the inevitable 
luck which always waited the ruin of this young 
' Prince) he turned upon him a sword, which was di 
rected against the wild boar: So died he miserably 
not able to shun the effect of his fathers dream. | £ 
/ King Astyages and Cyrus the fit of that name. L 
» A 12868 King of the Medes, grandfather by the f 
x mothers fide to Cyrus, had two dreams; the firsthhed, 
whereof was that the lady, his daughter, covered withsfcorc 
Her iflue all the Regions of Asia : By reason whereof, | 
- he. would not marry her to any great personage o ) U 
that Country, left the Kingdom should descend or } 
Tome to him or her; for he stood in doubt thereof inte 
But he gave her in marriage to a man of a mean estates die 
in the Country of Persia, His second dream was, 
that he saw proceed out of the loinsof his daughter, al C 
Vine, which by continual growth overshadowed all © 
che parts of his Dominions : And therefore he com- af 
manded that Cyrus which was born of her, —_ be wi 
| * 8 thrown] ! 


: 
| 
| 
: 
; 


— — 


- ww 


$ 7 
1 


— 2 —w ——k— UP 96 ˙ —ꝝ—ꝝ- 
— 


? * * 
* A 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 149 
own out and exposed to the wild beasts, to let 


am foretold. 
Of - Amilcar, 


| Milcar, colonel” to the Carthaginians, when he 


nt at the next night he should sup in the same Town. 
To 
S. 
ha 


ra 


JU 


utiny in this camp between the Carthaginians and 
Sicilians : So that those of the town making a 


amen sally, took him Prisoner, aud made him per 


blesce sup in their town. So then much deceived of 
ng 3 which he conceived by his dream; he supped 
di- the same town as a Captive not as a captain, as he-. 
ly 0 _ accept pr * supposed. 


07 Alcibiades. 
e. 
the 
rst 
ith 


ording to the appetite of Lysandra. 
— 


Of ucen Margaret. 


or C King's eye was digged out : And accordingly a 
of inter of a spear struck out his eye, of which wound 
ate died. 

- Of a Cintry-woman. 


wn G 3 | Kings 


A.” . 


m die. But be deceived bimself by his humane 
wnsel and wisdom, supposing to hinder the felicity of 
6 little son, whom the Heavens preserveds. as the 


— — - 0 - — wo — - 
" - * 27 
— — - 


| had besieged Syracuse, a Town of Sicily, in his 
am seemed to hear a voice, which said unto him, 


joyful of tis good News, thought that God had 
mised him victory, put his camp in arms, thinking 
give an assault and take the Town: But there fell 


\ Leibiades dreamed that he was Covered with his 
friends gown with which he dreamed he was co- 
d, he was after slain by the people of Farnabasa, 


off) Ueen Margaret dreamed that Henry the French 6 


Country-woman dreamed that she was delivered TER) 
of a Moon, which shined over all Britain. She 
s afterwards delivered of a daughter, was bought by: *: . 
| be wile of the Kings Herd- 8 nursing then tle 


„ 1% ARTIMEDORUS. 


5 


a worthy King of England, whose fame, like the 


evidence and truth thereof, Two friends of Arcadia 


the treason of his host; and if he would make haste 
he might deliver him of great danger wherein he was 
Aster which viston he rose, and set forward to go te 


him of his purpose, thinking it in vain to go so bl 


| keeper was executed by the sentence of death. 


not forget the story (but which is more strange) founs, 
his dreams verified. This it is, whilst I lived at Praguq 
and one night had sat up very late drinking at a fea 


o "TI 
% 


Kings son : And fo they growing both to elder years off 
the Kings Son married her, and had by her Ethelstone, ry 
Moon, shined through Britain. - 
Of two Arcadians, 1 
FT Hough this dream ensuing be longer to repeat. 

than the former, it is worthy our memory for the. 


? 


travelling together, came to Megara ; the one of * 


them repaired to a house of his acquaintance, thqbm 
other lodged in a Lein. The first dreamed tha 


night that the other prayed him to help him againslf n 


yhe 
night to such a Tavern, So he returned td his bed 


this Inn: Afterwards by ill luck, he began to repen 


mis companion was wounded to death by his ho, aue 
and prayed him, that though he did not come to say 8 


bis life, yet he would revenge his death by all means] 
Telling him, that his body was m urthered by his hoff 1 
was at that instant carried right to the gate of th 1 


ton, ang there he found the cart which he had seeF A 
in his slgep: And after he had stayed it, he layed hie 
| band upon the collar of this Inn:keeper, , followe 


de 
the suit ; and the crime being consessed, the In and 
an English Gentleman. 

1 Shall set down a relation given by an english gent] 
man, of two dreams that he had, wherein he dif 


yet | 


deat 


early in the morning the Sunbeams glancing on, 
7 | 10 


* 


—— n 


eng by, told me, that my father was dead: At "7A 
o hich awaking, all in a sweat, and affected with this 


ream, I rose and wrote the day and hour, and all 
ircumstances thereof in a book, which book, with 
nany other things, I put in a barrel, and sent it from 
razue to Stode, thence to be conveyed into England, 


Wome months past. I list not to write _ lies, but 
What which I write, is as true as strange: When Ire 


ot open the barrel I sent from Prague, nor look into 


bad called my sister and some friends to be witnesses, 
here my self and they were astonished to see my 
vritten, dream answer the very day of my fathers 
eatb. I may lawfuly swear that which my kin{men 
dave heard witnessed by my brother Henry whiltt he 
ied, that in my youth at Cambridge, I had the like 


hing with me, early in the morning I dreamed that 
ey mother passed by with a sad countenance, and told 
une, that she could not come to my commencement. 


We 


bridge. And when I related this dream to my bro- 
her, both of us awaking together in a sweat, he pro- 
\d{<fted to me, that he had dreamed the very same : 


hers sickness, neither in our youthful affections were 
Iny whit affected with the strangeness of this dream; 
yet the next Carrier brought us word of our mothers 
death, , I am not over credulous of such relations, but 
fac . 684 me 


u 


gu 


ea 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 151 | 
P. ' 4 * - 4 = | 
ice, as 1 lay in my bed, I dreamed, that a shaddow 


* 
18 
AF 


Jide now being at Nuremburgh, a Merchant of / 
oble Family, well acquainied with me and my 
Wiends, arrived there; who told me, my father died © 


rned into England, some few years after, I would 


he paper book, in which I had writen this dream, till 


Iream of my mother*s dedth, where my brother Henry 


being within five months to proceed master of Arts, 
and she having promised at that time to come to Cam- 


And when we had not the least knowledge of our mo- 


152: ART ITME.D-O RUS. 
methinks the circumstance” of publishing at such a 
time when there were those living that might have 
disproved it, if it had been false, it is a great argu- 
ment of the truth of it. LS 
D a Citiaen of London. 
J Pon the 16th of December at night, in the year 
1635. Being the sixth night of my being in the 
, Country, I being 18 miles distant from London, and 
not hearing from thence touching the health or sick- 
ness of any fijend there, and being in a good lodging 
after a short sleep about eleven of the clock I awoke, 
and being much troubled and disturbed at a dream l 
_ © dreamt, was not able to compose my self to my rest, 
but prefently told my dream to a faithful friend my 
bed-fellow, which was, that a special friend of ours 
at London was on his death- bed; and my fancy fug- 
_ gested to me, that I saw_him laid forth, and covered 
for dead: But was answered by my bed-fellow, that 
t was but a dream, and nad no reality in it. IC. 
withstanding continued my fear, and hastened my 
journey to London, whither when I came, the first 
= news heard was, that my. friend was dead; and in- 
L -quiring the time when died, found that it was in 
T the very same night wherein I dreamt the aforesaid 
dream of him; though when he left London he was 
in as good health, to outward appearance, as any 
man could be. Ys | 
Another Relation from the same Hand. 
bout 18 years since, I having fome of my family 
| 4 4 miles srom London, and one night sleeping in 
bed very unquietly, I imagined, that I perfectly and 
| plainly saw a kinswoman, a very ggod friend of mine, 
|. lying in extream torment, and pain, making great 
lamentation all that night; whereupon I rose early in 
the morning, and sent a servant 4 miles tò bring moon 
| w 


— 


* 


© os | wv I © fo 6 @o SY pun Uy | ww (& = 


how my nearest relation, and her mother did; word 
was. brought, that they were all in good bealth, not- 
withstanding Lwas extreamly unsatisfied in my mind, 
had continual fear that some or other of my kindred 
was afflicted with some extraordinary pain, and ac- 
cordingly it fell out ; for about one or two of the 


clock the next day came two horsemen in great haste, 


making over to my dwelling in Farringdon without 
in London, and the first alighting from his horse, I 
perceived him to be the brother to my kinman's wife; 
and inquiring of her health he told me, that she was 
now in some travel, and had been fo near 48 hours, 
and could not be delivered; and he desired (that with 


all possible speed) we should agree with doctor Cham- 


berlain, to afford the best assistance he could for the 


saving his sisters life, which gy was done; fo 


that within less than an hour the doctor was upon his 
journey with a coach and four horses, but not reach- 
ing the House till the night following, it pleased God, 


that just as he was alighting out of the coach, my 


kinswoman gave up the gho 


Of a Woman desirous to bring forth, | | 
A Certain woman very desirous to bring forth a 
Child, dreamed in a night, that her womb was 


sealed by the Gods; whereupon as one affrighted very 


sore with this sign, she repaired to the Prophets for 
their opinions in the matter. Some held, that by 
the sea), a secret let, impediment, and'bar in nature 
was implied; so that it-was not impoffible for her to 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 153 


: 
dn . £ 
. _ __— —— ——— —  — —  — — — -—- . 
— — £4 8 - 


7 


Conceive. But other doctors were of the mind, that 
she had conceived, and was sped already before tùhe 


dream ;. because the manner is, not 'to make tore of 


1 
i? 
# 
Gs of. 
5 . £4 
4 , es 
* 
. T4 


x i 


1:4 ARTIME-DORUS. 


r . —˙·‚ 
9 


_ ' : e 
N 4 A wy — 4 * * - 


; Of Endemus a hanished man. 
A Certain man called Endemus, being warranted by 
> divers of the best Expositors of — during 
the time of his exile, that after five years he should 
return home to his native soil with great honour, died 
at the five years end in Syracuse ; being deceived in 
his expeRation of returning home to his own country. 
| Of Herod. 
A Fter Herod had unjustly made away his wife 
++ Mariamna, (whose title was much better to the 
regiment of Paless ine than his) she scemed every night 
to trouble and- wake him out of his sleep, fo great is 
the fear and horrour of a bleeding concience. 
0a wicked Man guilty .of Murder. 
FT. Here was one who having been a wicked and su- 


© * 


dornate instrument, to bring an innocent, a no- 


ble, and a loving master to his end, repaired to a son 
of his, more then 20 years after for pardon of his fault, 


5 alledging that the father of that person, his old master 
pin 


and and tormented him by night in such a 
wretched fort, as he could take no rest or ease at any 


time; party besought God to pardon him, ad- 


a Joynining only this advice in charity, that he would 


eek by counsel of some good learned Man, to lack 


the. Furnace of a guilty concience, which Yent up | 
_ these frights and fumes of-melancoly fancies to his 


head. 


ut this wicked caitif was bereft of his wits, 


.in which unfortunate and heavy plight he deceased, 


a Scythian, 


; | JT i reported by Pater? Siculus, that a Scythian | 


dreaming that Esculapius, the great God of phy- 


fick, had drawn the noisom humours of his bady to 
one certain place or head; was constrain'd within a 
"while lance a festered and most dangerous imposthume 
of filthy matter: Not that the dreams were causes of 


the 


s ww wks wan RN WV 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 155 
the poison, which began to move and ftir within the 
reins, and would impare the parties health, if it were 
not prevented in good time with convenient order and 
advice of learning. 

W.' 4 two Men * one and the samt thing. 
T Men that should contend in gaming at Olym- : 

pus, dreamed in one night that they were drawn 

4 swift coursers in a chariot, where upon they 

Mi repared to a prophet, of their acquaintance, for 
some light before hand what their luck should be; 
the prophet crastily considering. that it was impossible 
both these runners should have good success ; thought 
to make his profit of them both, by the'cunning of his 
own devise and sly shift in answering, till proof might 
afford him so much credit by the gain of one, as : 
disgrace by the dan age of the other. To the first 
therefore gave great encouragement and comfort. to 
hope, that he should- prevail; because (faith he) four 
horses representing in a figure) the team of Phoebus, 
could not but import assured Victory. The second he 
dis-ouraged with fear, because albeit four horses ran 
before, yet himself was last of all, which imporzed that 
he should be cast behind, and not get the wager. 

Of Dion and Brutus, Platonian Phile/sphers, 

He death of Dion and Brutus were shew-d unto 

them, by horrible v. sions that appeared un: them, 

which they have told unto theit friends. ' here are 
many that cannot abide these opinions, and do main- 
tain that these fights and evil spirits do never appear to 
any man that hath right wits, but that they are either 
childrens fancies, or old womens sables; but most 
certain it is, that v.sions have appeared, and that some 
times but in dreams, by the attestation of these philo- 
sophers, as well as by the interpretation of them by 
Artimedorus. 


1 . 
* * 


156 4RFIMEDORUS. 


vpon a pole that hung cloaths out of the gatret wine 


Of a woman with child. | 


Woman with child longing for a bakers shoulders 


X which carried her bread unto the oven, she re- 
jected all other meat, and dreamt only of that; her 


. husband desiring to content her, wrought so with the 


ker, as for a certain fum of money, he was content 
xe should taste of that shoulder she had fo much desi- 


red; the baker endured her teeth twice, but she had 
bitten him fo sore, as he would not endure a third 
charge. The woman longing till, and often dream- 


ing of the bakers shoulders, at last fell in labour of 

sons, 2 alive the tbird dead. 

ESA Of cardinal. Crescence. | 

HE being at Verona and palling further about some 
- matters of importance, and writing very late at 

night, went to bed; after a while he dreamed, and 


-- 


- amagined that he saw a black dog of an exceeding great- 


ness, having fiery eyes, and his ears hanging to the 
ground, which came directly towards him, and then 
hid himself under the table ; he was presently awaked 
at this vision, and was like one in a swound, but com- 
ing to himself, he cried out aloud, to his servants, to 


d seek the dog with a light, but not finding him, a 


feaver seized on him, and increased in such sort, as he 
died. Towards the end of his life, he cried often to 
his servants in his sleep, drive away this dog which runs 
up to my bed. It was imposlible to resolve and com- 


fort him, but at last in great dispair he died at 


erona. . 
Of a young man. 


E 'T Here was a young man, who dreaming in the 


night that he was to ride forth about some busi- 


© ness, rose up out of his bed, being fast asleep, made 


himfelf ready, put om his boots and spurs, and getting 


dow, 


— 


WY {t& ko He 1, HY = 1" _ O©7 


s WY #8 C3 > 1oWA©H9IMH WU ke. © * kW. ry 03 


His Interpretation of Dreams, 1857 
dow, he fat astride on it, and began to spur with his 
heels, as if he he had been on horse back ; but awa- 
king he was so terrified with this accident, as he was 
ready to run mad, which made him seek to the physici- 
cians for help. [$4.4 7 7525 
Of a Cholerick and guarrelsame man. 25 
Tlere was one, who being of a cholerick and 
quarrelsome disposition, used commonly to 
dream that he was fighting with one or other ; and 
thereupon rising out of his bed, ran to his weapon, 
drew out his sword, and fencing with it after a strange 
manner, ruck and foiled at the chamber walls, in so 
much that they were fain to take away every thing out 
of the chamber, that might not hurt himself or others. 


Of an artificer. 


There was an artificer that in his sleep rose out of 


his bed, and went up and down the stairs, and all 
about the house : Upon a time he went in his sleep in 
the shop, unlocked the doors, went into the ftreets, 
where being awakened by some of his friends that met 
him, he being so ashamed, that he never fell into the 
like dream again. . 


Of George de Schilinitz. 


G grave and unreprovable person, was wont with 
two of his brethren to walk many times in their sleep, # 
whilst they were students at Lipfick ; yea, to get up 
into garrets, and on the top of houses, so that one f 
his brothers chanced to fall and break his thigh. At 
length their tutor looking narrowly unto them, whip» 
ped them welfavouredly, assoon as they got out of their 
bed, which having continued twice or thrice until such 
time as they awaked, by that means they were-halped. 


_W 


de Schilintz, Councellor to divers princesa | 


258 ARTIMEDORUS. 
| Of three young gentlemen. 
T Here were three young gentlemen, brethren ly- 
Ning ia one chamber, one of them rose up naked, 
found: asleep, and carring his shirt in his hand, went 
to the window, where he caught hold of a cord baug- 
jag to a certain pully, and winding himself to the top 
of the hause met with a birds nest, got out the young 
ones, wrapped them up in his shirt, let himfelf down 
again, re-entred the chamber, laid himself down in his 
| bed, and slept as before. Awaking inthe morning, 
| faith he to his brothers, what think you my dream 
was to night? methought I rose out of my bed, went 
{ to the window, and got up to the top of the house, 
{ where] found a birds nest. and brought away the 
| \ young ones. His brothers laughed at it, and after 
some talk, going to rise he sought up and down for his 
shirt, which at last he found with the young birds 
wrapped in it* they ran. presently and looked up to 


the top of the house, and saw where the birds nest had 
deen pulled out. 3 


Of a young Scholar. 

A Young scholar oi Blackenburgh did that sleeping, 
which he could scarce do awake. As soon as Þz 

had supt, he would have fallen into so dead a sleep, 
that hardly any noise could awake him, with pinching 
and pulling they had made him look up, yet carrying 
him to bed, he slept as before; and whatsoever be held 
ing so a sleep, were it a table, a napkin, or any 
'garment, they were fain to have two or three men to [sur 
open his fingers, and make him let go his holt, in so- hin 
much that many times holding his cloaths in his hands, 
they were forced to carry bim to bed, and let him ly Ihe 
with them till he awaked of himself the next morning. [wh 


of 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 159 
O the Duke of Holstein's Cook. TS 

E rising in his sleep, went down out of his cam- 
ber, and having past through a great wide court, 
ntered into the kitchen, and got into the well, strad- 
ing with his feet, and with his fingers clinging so | 
ard to the sides of it, he descended with nothing but 1 
is shirt on till he came to the Water, which wetting 
the skirts of his shirt, it struck so cold to his heels that 
e awaked, and began to cry out, o my legs help me. 

he folks of the house awaked with the cry, and F 
somewhat understanding the voice, sought for him, |} 
nd finding him hanging in the well, they reached | 


; 
| : 
down a ladder, with a candel and lanthorn, but not 1 
ble to get him up that way, they let down a Bucket, b 
biding him put his right foot in it, and with his hands +} 
to hold fast by the chain of the well, they carried him 
to bed, having lost his speech, and opening his eyes 
very seldom, at length he began to stir a little, and to 
. 


man Ys CHO Uo TY ww W TY = wW SS. TO WP ..Y 


mutter forth some words, but vomitting exceedingly, 
the next day he came to himself, and told tbem how . 
that night he dreamt that he was walking, and with 
stumbling had like to have fallen, and that he thought 
he had been over head and ears in water, | 

Of Tapia, a Spanish Gentleman. 
E was used to rife often in his sleep, and do many 
things 'about the house ; and go from ove place 
to another without awaking but to the end no mis- 
chance should come unto him, he had always a bason 
of water fet by his bedside : Now one night in the 
summer time he rose in His shirt, put a cloak about 
= {him got out of doors, being all this while fast asleep; 
„ land dreaming he was going to swim, and met (as 
y he thought) another man, who demanded of bim 
;- {| whither he went so late ? It is hot, said Tapia, and I 
mean to go and wash my self, And so will I, quoth 

8 | the 


ow» = HoUY Uy w Ov W 


L to call that other, who was not to be seen: Where⸗ 
"upon fearing it was some evil spirit that had drawn 


us 5 which she continued long, until | 
+ © beifng advertised thereof, watched ber ip the street 
| and whipt her well; to make her leave that gustom, 


TT I” oe S — DT CC —ß 
| | 9 
. x — 
—_ 


4 * 
- 


sso, he got upon a bridge that was therevy and leaping 


> of Young maiden at Paris did every night usually go 


* 


1 
88 
| * 


dis companions, rose up in his fleep, and went and 
flew his enemy, lying in his bed in another chamber, 


gan to say, you cannot swim, I am sure, Marry 


- much, do as I have done. Tapia follows him, and 


the other ; come let us Santos to gether, With all 
my heart, faith "Tapia, Thereupon they got them to 
the river, where Tapia putting off his cloak and shirt, Fai 
was going into the water; but the other jesting, be- 


but I can, replyed Tapia, and it may be better than 
you. Well, (quoth the other) follow me, and saying 


down into one of the deepest places of the river, swam ff 
up and down, and called to Tapia, fince you brag fo 


leaps into the river: And all this was done in his fleep; 
so as soon as his feet touched the water he awaked, 
and labouring all that possibly be could, he Mee to 


bim into that danger, after he had recommended 
himself unto God, be swam over the river, took up 
bis cloak and shirt, and returned home, recounting | 


N 


that which had happened unto him. 
| a young Maiden in France. 

* to bath herself in the river, 9 a sleep, the 

that her father 


whergat the maiden awaked, and was much ashamed 
to fee herself naked in the street, - 4 

FO conclude with the example of a scholar, whahyas 
1 having had a quarrel the night before with one offong 


Ike 
: 


* 
um, 


and then.return'd to his own bed without awaking;hern 
@ it was supposed, for the next day the justice being 7 


His Interpretation of. Dreams. 161 
alled by the host, found him a sleep, and his dagger 
loody, confessiog that he had dreamt that he had 
ain him whom they said was murthered. 2 
There ate many such examples by the which we ti 
ay conclude, that besides the natural and vita] | 
culties of the soul, (the which is affirmed to be very 14 
owerful in fleepers) these also that are dedicated and }| 
bject to our wills, do labour, caused by the means 
f the Muscles; as to go, to embrace, to speak, 
There have been many found, who rising thus 
eeping, and goivg up into windows that have been 
pen have. fallen down to the ground, breaking their 
ms and legs ; others have been found stark dead, 
nd some so greviously wounded as they have been 
en. after giving up the ghost ; but it sufficeth to 
wopound such as have escaped (the which are set 
own in books” that we haye seen) untill that time 
up hay discover the rest, by some man more diligent 
gh 27 cu; TEC 2ay note all if be please. 


J 


OI " . * bf 
At Celis A IEEE S374 Di EL ORG DG WEARS. i 


The Dream of Alexander. — 

70 0 Uin tus Curtius declareth in the life of Ale xar der, 
he that when he maintained his siege before the 
er Pity of Tyre, the succouri of the Carthaginians he: 
ing entred. ; who said they were descended | 

n, [Firians, concluded to raise his fiege, as despairing of 

ed ver surprising it. But in a dream a Satyr appeared to 
lim, after whom he followed as he fled before him iq 
> a chamber. His interpreters told him, that this... 5 
hafvas a certain forewarning to continue his siege for i 
offlonger days before the City, and that he should surely 4 
dike it, which fell out accordingly, as was fore toll 
TyÞy a Prophet; who said, That a Greek, shoul go- 
g⸗pern in that Country, F 
7 Ss 

ed | | | A 


FP! Amilcar at the siege of Syracuse, dreamed that 


the town, as indeed he did; tho? not as a Prince, 


nothi g that is done in every part and quarter of the 


Again, because the spirits are not clogged with this 
unwildly lump of flesh, which not only taketh off our | 
edge of vit, and sinketh vs more deep into the mossy 
mould of earth, than is expedicnt for the sharpnefs of | - 
our senses, but stinteth us besides to certain limits and 
degrees, in bringing great effects to pass; we mult 


either Francis the post, or any other in the world, 


flowers, and flourishing plants, who whi'st she 


= * B „ N es: l 1 | 
152 ARTIMEDORUS. 
A Dream of great hope altered to the quite contrary, 


the next night after he should sup withint 


which he believed, but as a Prisoner, which was fur- 
the? from his imaginations, 

That spi its give intelligence by sleep or otherwise, 
A Nother means whereby the spirits are more able 

to 2ive warning touching things to come, is sup- 
posed to consist in the quality of the place from 
whence they look ; for as the Centinel, who kept 
watch, <spied the post that hasted to the King, before 
all others ; fo there 1s no doubt, but (flickring aloft and 


world) the spizits may more easily divine, and give 
advertisement by fleep, or otherwise, accordingly.” 


allot unto their share, a far greater flight of agility and 
nimbleness, in removing hastily from one coast to an- 
othef; and in bringing news with greater speed, than 


„ 


T Here was one, that dreamed she was walking in 
a greenish mead, all fragrant with beautiful 


wondred and ftood as amazed at the glory of the 


' Spring, an ancient Sir all withered and lean faced 


with oldness, the very emblem of death, made to- 
wards her with a green bough- in his hand, sharping it 
at the end, who as she fled away from his pursuit, 

8 Gy darted 


e 


* 99 — 


His Interpretation of Dreams. 163 
Jarted it often at her, the branch three times coming 
ery near her, yet did not touch her at all; ws 
hen he saw he could not prevail with his aim, 
vanished away, and left the bough behind; and she 
astonished and affiighted with the dream - presently, 
oke: Now mark Jhe sequel of it; within three {| 
days after she was for her recreation sake walking in 
a green closure, hard by a pond side, and on a suld- 
f 


den her brain was so intoxicated and distgmpered, 
whither with a spice of the virtigo, or what amazing, 
disease soever I know not ; but she was hurried into 
the deep, with her head forward, in great peril of 
drowning, and if she had not caught fast hold by |; 
chance of a hranch that hung over the water, the had 
been drowned. | 1 * 
T Here also are fatal dreams; as when we dream of 
eagles flying over our heads, it protends unfortu- 
. nateness, Io dream of marriages, dancing, and ban- 
que: ing, fore tei some of our kinssolks ate departed. 
To dream of silver, sorrow ; if thou hast it given to 
thy self : Of gold, good fortune. To lose an axle- 
tooth, or an eye, the death of Tome special friend. 
To dream of ' bloody teeth, the death of the dreamer : 
To weep in sleep, joy: To contemplate ones face in 
the water, and to see the dead, long life : To dream 
of chickens, and birds commoly ill luck. | 
D Reams are notable means of discovering our own 


\ - 
WT. 1 ere * 2 r 


y inclinations. . The wiie man learns to know, 
' | himself, as well by the nights black mantle, as the 
© | scorching beams of the day: in sleep, we have the 
3 naked and natural thoughts of our souls: Outward 


objects interpose not, either to shuffle in occasional 
cogi tations or hale out the included fancy. The mind 
is chen shut up in the burrough of the body. It was 
a custom among the Indians, when their Kings went 
to 


— 


LIC... On % 
— „ — . M 
— — , —— —— nn, ace en 


164 ARTIMEDORUS. 
do their sleep, to pray with piping acclamations, that 

"they mige have 900 2 and withal consult 
well for their subjects benefit; as if the night had been 
atime wherein they might grow good and wise. And 
certainly the wise man is the wiser for his sleeping, 
if he can order well in. the day, what the eye-less 
night presents him every dream is to be counted of;'” 
or yet are all to be cast away with contem.pt I 
would neither be a stock, superstitious in all; nor yet ton 
an epicure, considerate of none. So that I doubt ace 
not but either to preserve health; or amend the life. ¶ con 


- dreams may to a wise observer, be of special benefit; ¶ Ki, 


I would neither depend upon any, to incur a preju- | see; 
dice, not yet cast away, in a prodigal negle& and Ica 
scorn. I find it of one that having been troubled with || wo 
the paining spleen ; that he dreamt, if he opened a + gr 
certain vein between two of his fingers he should be | 
© Cufed, which he awaking did, and amended. But 
Indeed I would rather believe this, than to be drawn Ih 
to practice after it. a 
8 In Bakers Chronicle Fol, 
ONE Ann Waters, enticed by a lover of hers, 
nsented to have her husband strangled, and then 
buried bim secretly under a dunghill in the cow- house ;, | 
whereupon. the man being missing by his neighbours,” 
and the wife making thew of a wondring what was 
become of bim; it pleased God, that one of the In- 
- habitznts of the town, dreamed one night that his 
neighbour. Waters was strangled. and buried under the 
dunghil in a cow-house ; and upon declaring his 
dream; search being made by the Constable, the dead 
body was found as he had dreamed; and thereupon 
the wife was apprehended, and upon examination, 
confessing the fact, was burned : And now what hope 
can murderers have of being concealed, when they 
| | are 


are subject to be discovered by any mans dream. 
KIN G James the fifth of Scotland, was a great 


enemy to the light of the Gospel, which in days. 


brake forth in that Kingdom vz. about the year, 
1541, and out of a blind and bloody zeal, was heard 


to say, that none of that fort should expect any fa» 


©F'vour at his hands; nay, not his own sons, if they 


proved guilty : but not long after, Sir James Ham- 


ton, being suspected to incline that way, was falsly 
accused of a practice against the Kings life, and being 
condemned, Was executed; but not long after the 
King being at Linlithgow, on a night as he slept, it 
seemed ro him, that Thomas Scot, Justick Clerk 
came unto him with a company of devils, crying, 


| 


dor serving thee against- God, and against his servants, 
am now adjudged to Hell torments : Hereupon the 
King awaking, called for Lights, telling them what 
The had heard and seen. The next morning by da 
light, word was brought of Scot's death, which fell 
out just at the time when the King found himself so 
troubled, for Scot then died in great extremity, utter- 
ling these words, by the righteous judgment of God I 
P lam condemned; which being related to the King, 
made the dream more terrible. | . 
; | A N other vision he had more terrible not many 
nights after: He thought he saw Sir James Hamil- 


ö 

fa sword drawn in his hand, wherewith he cut his arms, 
; [threatning also to return within a short time, and de- 
| {prive him of his life: With this awakened, news 
; {was brought him of the death of his two sons, James 
fand Arthur; who died both at the very fame hour, 
> [Next year 1542. Being ovecome with grief he died 
sin Faulkland, in the 32d, year of his age, 8 
; | op 


, Interpretation of Dreams. 165 


wojworth the day that ever I knew thee or thy service; 


ton, whom he had caused to be executed, came with 


— 


" 16 ARTIMEDORUS. 


. _ shop Spotswood's History of the Church of Scotland 
A Young Man, whose mother lived near London 
travelling into Wales, in the year 1636. wher 
staying all the summer, he dreamed the 20th. of Sept 
about midnight, that he saw his mother sick in bed 
with the pangs of death upon her, and all his brothei 
and sisters weeping and lamenting about her: Whic 
affrighted him out of his sleep. Yet considering it w 
but a dream, he pretty well pacified himself and arose 
but no sooner came down stairs, but the maid ask 
him how he did, he replied he was well; she faid sh 
was hartily glad to hear it, for the dreamed that night 
that he was destracted, and raved, and tore evei 
thing that came near him, and that she had been ver 
much troubled far him all night. This dream (hap 
pening the same night) gave him fo fresh an occasion} C, 
to reflect on his own, that he immediately set da 
in a book, the night, and hour he dreamed it, whic 
he well knew, by a clock in the house, that struc 
one after he awaked, In November after coming t 
London, and going to his brother in Drury-Lane 
_- © the first news he heard was his mother was dead, B 
inquiring when she died, he was assured by his brd J 
ther and sister, that she departed on Sunday the 20t 
- of September about midnight ; which compared wit 
the memorandum he had written, it appeared to b 
the very hour he had dreamed that dream, which 
can never forget. 
