THE  UNIVERSITY 


OF  ILLINOIS 
LIBRARY 


ULASSIGS 


' 


FABLES  OF  BABRIUS. 


THE 


FABLES  OF  BABRIUS, 

IN  TWO  PARTS, . 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH  VERSE 
FROM  THE  TEXT  OF  SIR  G.  C.  LEWIS. 


BY  THE 

REV.  JAMES  DAVIES,  M.A. 

Sometime  Scholar  of  Lincoln  College , Oxford . 


LONDON : 

LOCKWOOD  AND  CO. 
STATIONERS’  HALL  COURT. 
MDCCfcLX. 


LONDON 

R.  CLAY,  PRINTER,  BREAD  STREET  HILL. 


-'*»  * $ \\  \ % V3 i i . ^ ^ j *S  cj^  Y\  & \ (i  V. 


Cicx^xuc^ 


TO 


THE  RIGHT  HONOURABLE 

SIR  GEORGE  CORNEWALL  LEWIS, 

Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department, 
Honorary  Student  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  and 
Editor  of  the  Fables  of  Babrius, 

THIS  ATTEMPT  TO  RENDER  INTO  ENGLISH  VERSE 


WHOM  HIS  LITERARY  LABOURS  HAVE  EFFECTUALLY 


WITH  RESPECT  AND  GRATEFUL  ACKNOWLEDGMENT 


WHO  WOULD  FAIN  TAKE  HIM  AS  A MODEL 
IN  BLENDING  CLASSICAL  STUDY  WITH  THE  SEVERER 


THE  FABLES  OF  AN  AUTHOR. 


RESCUED  FROM  OBLIVION. 


IS  DEDICATED 


BY  ONE 


DUTIES  OF  LIFE. 


Moor  Court,  Herefordshire, 


PREFACE. 


N°  question  is  more  often  put  to  one  who  pro- 
fesses an  acquaintance  with  the  Fables  of  Babrius 
than,  “Who  was  Babrius?  when  did  he  live?”  and 
the  querist  is  sceptical,  when,  in  answer,  he  is  bidden 
to  discard,  as  erroneous,  the  notion  that  it  is  to  ^Esop, 
and  not  to  Babrius,  that  he  owes  the  collection  of 
Fables  which  charmed  his  youth.  Yet  so  it  is,  and 
it  is  hoped  that  the  version  of  Babrius  into  English, 
now  put  forth,  may,  with  the  aid  of  a prefatory  state- 
ment, based  on  the  researches  of  the  learned,  tend  to 
place  the  matter  in  a true  light.  Those  who  have  no 
knowledge  of  Classics  will  marvel  to  see  how  much 
is  owed  to  a fabulist,  whose  work  has  been  rescued 
from  oblivion  within  the  last  twenty  years. 

Not  that  no  traces,  indeed,  of  Babrius  existed  before 
that  date.  Bentley  indicated  remains  of  his  Fables  in 


Vlll 


Preface . 


a dissertation  which  gave  rise  to  the  famous  dispute 
respecting  the  Epistles  of  Phalaris.  These  traces, 
Tyrwhitt,  in  1776,  followed  up,  collecting  all  the  frag- 
ments of  Babrius  found  in  the  Grammarians,  with 
some  new  verses  from  a MS.  of  ^Esopian  Fables  in 
the  Bodleian,  and  four  entire  fables  (12,  58,  84,  129,) 
which  had  come  down  from  one  source  or  another. 
Later  still,  an  Italian,  Francesco  de  Furia,  edited 
from  MSS.  in  the  Vatican  library,  several  Fables 
before  unpublished,  which  added  greatly  to  the 
Babrian  remains  ; for  though  in  the  form  of  prose, 
they  were  found  easily  reducible  into  Choliambic 
verse,  into  which  they  had  been  turned  by  our  author 
from  the  oral  or  traditional  collections  of  ^Esopian 
Fables,  and  out  of  which  (says  Blomfield,  Mus.  Crit. 
1.  410)  they  had  been  “transprosed  ” by  some  monk.1 

1 There  seems  to  have  been  no  written  collection  of  Esop ; 
for  when  he  is  cited  by  ancient  authors,  there  occurs  a diversity 
.which  would  have  been  prevented  by  a collected  edition.  See 
Smith’s  Diet.  G.  R.  B.  vol.  i.  p.  47,  b.  The  same  dictionary, 
ibid,  has  the  following  account  of  the  spurious  prose  collections 
bearing  the  name  of  iFsop,  now  extant.  “ These  are  three. 
“One  containing  136  Fables,  published  first  A.D.  1610,  from 


Preface . 


IX 


In  1844,  M.  Minoides  Menas,  a learned  Greek, 
commissioned  by  M.  Villemain,  Minister  of  Public 
Instruction  under  Louis  Philippe,  found,  amongst 
other  literary  treasures,  in  the  Convent  of  St.  Laura, 
on  Mount  Athos,  a MS.  of  Babrius,  lost  in  the  middle 
ages.1  It  was  much  damaged,  and  the  monks  asked 
so  high  a price  for  it,  that  Menas  declined  to  buy  it, 
and  could  only  convey  a transcript  of  it  to  Paris, 
which  M.  Villemain  placed  in  the  hands  of  M.  Bois- 

“ MSS.  at  Heidelberg.  This  is  so  clumsy  a forgery  that  it  men- 
“ tions  the  orator  Demades,  who  lived  200  years  after  ^Esop, 

“ and  contains  a whole  sentence  from  the  Book  of  Job.  Some 
“ of  the  passages  Bentley  has  shown  to  be  fragments  ofCholiam- 
“ bic  verses,  and  has  made  it  tolerably  certain  that  they  were 
“ stolen  from  Babrius.  The  second  collection  was  made  by  a 
“monk  of  Constantinople,  Maximus  Planudes,  in  the  fourteenth 
“ century.  These  contain  at  least  one  Hebraism,  and  among 
“ them  are  words  entirely  modern,  e.g.  PovraXis,  a bird, 

“ Povvevpov,  a beast,  and  also  traces  of  Babrius.  The  third  col- 
“ lection  was  found  in  a MS.  at  Florence,  and  published  in  1809. 

“ Its  date  is  about  a century  before  the  time  of  Planudes,  and  it 
“contains  the  life  which  was  prefixed  to  his  collection,  and 
“ commonly  thought  to  be  his  own.” 

1 This  MS.,  with  another  on  paper,  a transcript  of  one  found  Q 
a few  years  ago  on  Mount  Athos,  and  containing  95  Fables,  which 
appear  as  Part  II.  of  the  present  translation,  the  Trustees  of  the 
British  Museum  purchased  of  M.  Menas  in  1857. 


X 


Preface . 


sonade  (see  Class.  Mus.  IT.  413),  by  whom  it  was 
published  in  October,  1844.  In  this  transcript  and 
in  the  MS.  the  Fables  are  arranged  alphabetically  over 
eighty  pages,  according  to  the  initial  letter  of  each 
Fable,  but  the  collection  only  reaches  the  letter  O. 
The  date  of  the  MS.  is  supposed  to  be  of  the  tenth 
century,  from  the  peculiarities  of  writing  observable 
in  it.  After  several  other  continental  editions1  follow- 
ing closely  on  the  Parisian,  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis,  no  new 
hand  at  Babrius  even  at  that  time  (see  a paper  in 
Philol.  Mus.  I.  p.  282),  put  forth  the  first  edition  of 
Babrius  in  England  in  1846.  This  possesses  among 
other  advantages,  that  of  entering  the  field  late 


1 Boissonade’s  edition  emends  many  blunders,  which  he  as- 
cribes to  the  Poet’s  being  a Roman  writing  Greek,  an  idea  which 
seems  to  be  baseless.  Many  errors  are  probably  referable  to  the 
transcriber.  This  first  edition  was  followed  very  shortly  by  one 
from  Berlin,  by  Lachmann  and  several  distinguished  coadjutors: 
an  able  work,  enriched  by  a valuable  appendix  of  Meineke  on 
Choliambic  metre,  but  unduly  depreciatory  of  the  previous 
labours  of  Boissonade.  Soon  after  appeared  an  edition  from 
the  Zurich  press,  by  Baiter  and  Orelli,  printed  in  good  type,  and 
conveniently  reserving  for  a subjoined  “adnotatio  critica  ” most 
of  their  conjectural  emendations. 


Prejctce . 


xi 


enough  to  have  availed  itself  of  whatever  was 
valuable  in  the  earlier  editions.  Its  editor’s  Latin 
notes,  concise  and  to  the  point,  strike  the  scholar  as 
the  model  of  what  Latin  notes  should  be  ; and  afford 
an  argument  in  favour  of  a practice  falling  into 
disuse  and  largely  superseded  by  pages  of  English 
annotation,  long  drawn  out,  the  quality  of  which  is 
generally  less  remarkable  than  the  quantity.  Sir 
Comewall’s  preface  is  exhaustive ; and  to  it,  as  well 
as  to  his  supplementary  MSS.  notes,  which,  with 
other  information,  the  translator  is  anxious  to  ac- 
knowledge with  gratitude,  the  present  preface  is 
chiefly  indebted  for  its  materials. 

The  first  important  question  suggested  by  Sir 
Comewall’s  preface  is  as  to  the  name  and  age  of 
Babrius.  He  discards  the  notion  of  Boissonade 
that  Babrius  was  a Roman,1  one  Valerius  Babrius, 
observing  that  if  he  was,  he  was  marvellously  at 

1 This  conjecture  is  based  on  the  word  BaXefip'iovj  in  the  MS. 
from  Mount  Athos,  and  on  the  title  B aXepiov  x(CPtalUL^lK0L  (ttlxoi 
prefixed  to  a fable  “De  Jove  et  Spe,”  in  the  Harl.  MS.  Both 
are  corruptions  of  B applov. 


Preface . 


xii 

home  in  Greek  language  and  literature ; and  at  any 
rate  was  not  desirous  to  pass  for  anything  but  a 
Greek.  His  knowledge  of  natural  history,  political 
institutions,  mythology  and  geography,  is  all  essen- 
tially Greek.  He  nowhere  mentions  Italy  or  Rome, 
or  the  lands  to  the  west  of  the  Mediterranean. 

Assuming  then  that  he  was  a Greek,  we  have  but 
scanty  data  for  a decision  as  to  the  time  when  he 
flourished.  The  notion  in  Tyrwhitt’s  day  was  that 
he  lived  at  no  long  time  prior  to  the  Augustan  age  ; 
a view  which  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis  seems  to  have  held 
when  he  wrote  a paper  in  the  Philological  Museum 
(I.  p.  282),  but  which  later  studies  have  induced  him 
to  alter.  The  Swiss  editors,  from  supposed  traces  of 
the  Alexandrine  grammarians  and  poets  in  his  verse 
and  diction,  are  inclined  to  fix  his  date  about  the 
time  of  Bion  and  Moschus ; while  Bergk,  in  a paper 
in  the  Class.  Museum  (III.  130),  places  it  as  far 
back  as  b.c.  250,  a time  at  which  Alexander,  son  of 
Craterus,  was  ruler  over  Euboea  and  Corinth.  Lach- 
mann  and  Fixius  each  contend  for  other  petty 
princes  of  a later  date,  in  the  Christian  era.  These 


Preface . 


xiii 

are  but  a few  guesses  out  of  a number  sufficient  to 
justify  the  adaptation  of  an  old  proverb,  “ Quot  critici, 
tot  sententiae but  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis  has  relieved  the 
question  of  a difficulty  imported  into  it,  by  discredit- 
ing the  hasty  inference  that  the  person  addrest  in 
Proem  I,  as  <3  Bpa  yyz  tzkvov,  is  the  same  who  in 
Proem  II.  is  called  a>  irai  fiaoikiioQ  'A\el;drcpov.  At- 
tempts to  fix  what  Alexander  is  meant,  by  connecting 
him  with  a son  named  Branchus,  may  well  be  deemed 
labour  lost.1  The  natural  inference  is  that  in  the  First 
Proem,  and  elsewhere,  Branchus,  a son  of  the  poet, 
is  addressed,  and  that  for  his  instruction  the  Fables 
were  written ; but  that  the  Second  Proem  of  Part  I. 
which  was  prefixed  probably  to  a second  edition,  so 
to  speak,  of  the  whole  Fables,  was  dedicated  to  a son 
of  some  prince  or  Emperor  Alexander,  to  whom 
Babrius  looked  up  as  his  patron. 

Sir  G.  C.  Lewis  favours  the  opinion  of  Boissonade 

i 

1 See  Proem  I.  v.  i.  Part  ist ; Proem  II.  v.  i.  Part  ist.  And 
compare  with  these  the  Proem  commencing  the  Second  Part  of 
the  Fables,  which  begins  fruovvov , c c ?ra t ; and  also  Fab.  xxiv.  v.  19. 
Part  II. 


XIV 


Preface . 


that  this  Alexander  was  Alexander  Severus  (the  date 
of  whose  death  was  a.d.  235),  and  as  this  is  only 
conjecture,  he  brings  in  support  of  it  several  corrobo- 
rative circumstances,  which  tend  greatly  to  establish  a 
probability. 

In  the  first  place,  Babrius  is  cited  by  no  earlier  writer 
than  Dositheus  Magister,1  a grammarian,  who  lived 
about  207  a.d.,  and  in  whose  'Epfirj  rev  para  are  two 
Fables  of  Babrius  in  Choliambic  verse  (F.  84,  129); 
which,  if  Dositheus  himself  introduced  into  his  own 
work,  will  bring  Babrius  to  a date  not  later  than  Sep- 
timius  Severus,  a.d.  207,  or  his  son,  Caracalla,  to 
whom  Alexander  Severus  claimed  sonship. 

Again  we  may  refer  the  words  of  Babrius  in 
Proem  II.  Part  I.  (where  the  Poet  traces  the  origin 

1 Plutarch,  Lucian,  Athenaeus,  are  silent  as  to  Babrius ; yet, 
had  Babrius  lived  prior  to  the  time  of  Augustus,  some  of  his 
fables  would  probably  have  found  their  way  into  Plutarch  : but 
when  that  writer  does  introduce  fables  of  a common  subject  with  t 
those  of  Babrius,  he  invariably  follows  another  version.  Phae- 
drus,  too,  boasting  to  be  the  first  to  transplant  Greek  fable  into 
Latium,  mentions  ACsop  alone,  as  furnishing  his  materials.  It 
would  follow  that  Babrius  was  unknown  to  Phaedrus,  and  Phae- 
drus  probably  lived  in  the  time  of  Tiberius. 


Preface , 


xv 


of  the  “ Fable  ” to  Syria  Antiqua,  a view  held  by  no 
other  Greek  writer),  to  a wish  to  flatter  his  assumed 
patron,  Alexander  Severus,  who  was  born  in  Phoe- 
nicia. It  is  clear,  too,  that  the  Poet  had  some  Asiatic 
connexion,1  which  might  still  farther  account  for  his 
desire  to  please  this  prince,  who  was,  moreover,  an 
especial  patron  and  student  of  Greek  literature ; 2 nor 
need  it  be  any  stumbling-block  that  this  Alexander  is 
termed  B cunXevg,  seeing  that  Roman  princes  were  so 
called  by  the  Greeks. 

Those  who  are  dissatisfied  with  this  attempt  to  fix 
the  date  of  Babrius,  will  find  no  traces  of  his  Fables 
earlier  than  the  Emperor  Julian,  a century  or  more 
later ; who,  in  his  Epistle  LIX,  quotes  a verse  of 
the  thirty-second  Fable,  v.  i.  without  the  author’s 
name.  Tzetzes  and  Suidas,  alone,  the  latest  of  the 
grammarians,  quote  much  from  Babrius,  previous  to 
the  finding  of  the  present  MSS.;  and  all  that  we  can 

1 Thus  he  was  familiar  with  the  Arabs,  Fab.  57,  v.  12.  The 
name,  too,  Branchus,  indicates  a connexion  with  Asia.  So  too, 
perhaps,  does  the  dialect  he  uses,  i.e . the  Ionic.  (See  below.) 

2 See  Lamprid.  vit.  Alex.  Sev.  c.  27,  30. 


XVI 


Preface . 


arrive  at,  with  any  approximation  to  certainty,  is,  that 
Babrius  lived  between  the  close  of  the  first  century 
after  Christ  and  the  age  of  Julian. 

There  was  no  Greek  metrical  version  of  the 
iEsopian  Fables  before  that  of  Babrius.  Socrates 
seems  to  have  versified  a Fable  or  two  in  elegiacs 
whilst  in  prison.  Demetrius  Phalereus  published 
a collection,  but  that  was  in  prose.  When  fables 
occur  in  Xenophon,  Aristotle,  Plutarch,  and  Lucian, 
they  are  narrated  in  the  writer’s  own  words,  not  cited 
from  any  poet.  Suidas  gives  fragments  of  fables  in 
Elegiac  or  Heroic  verse,  but  whence  gathered  is  un- 
known. Callimachus  would  seem  to  have  turned 
some  ^Esopian  Fables  into  Choliambics  ; but  Babrius 
claims  the  honour  to  himself,  and  says  (Proem  II. 
9 — 12)  that  many  imitators  forthwith  sprung  up.  His 
Fables  were  known  in  Greece  before  the  age  of  Suidas 
and  Tzetzes : and  the  prose  collections  of  Maximus 
Planudes,  and  others  in  later  days,  have  been  mainly 
based  on  his  version.  Nor  was  it  till  after  the  revival 
of  letters  that  the  opinion  obtained  any  credence, 
that  the  prose  ^Esopian  Fables  were  really  those  of 


Preface. 


XVII 


yEsop.  Nothing  could  be  more  manifestly  unsound. 
Even  before  Bentley,  learned  men  pronounced  them 
the  offspring  of  later  monks : not  probably  designed 
to  be  literary  impostures,  but  rather  entertaining 
paraphrases.  In  any  wise  the  Fables  of  Babrius  may 
claim  to  be  the  basis,  or  stock  material,  of  all  that 
comes  down  to  our  day  under  the  name  and  credit 
of  ^Esop. 

The  nature  of  the  present  work,  intended  as  it  is 
for  the  general  reader,  precludes  any  extended  re- 
marks upon  the  Choliambic  Metre,  in  which  the 
Fables  of  Babrius  are  written.  Scholars  will  find 
the  subject  amply  treated  in  the  preface  of  Sir  G.  C. 
Lewis  (pp.  xv — xx).  Suffice  it  here  to  say  that  a 
Choliambic  (a  lame,  halt  Iambic)  differs  from  the 
Iambic  Senarius  in  always  having  a spondee  or 
trochee  for  its  last  foot : the  fifth  foot,  to  avoid  slow- 
ness of  metre,  being  generally  an  Iambic. 

Neither  need  more  be  said  respecting  the  dialect 
of  Babrius  than  that  it  is  Ionic,  but  with  great  ap- 
proaches to  the  Attic  dialect  in  later  and  more  com- 
mon use.  The  Ionic  was  the  dialect  used  by  all 
b 


xviii  Preface. 

Choliambic  poets  from  the  days  of  Hipponax  and 
Ananius,1  and  it  was  therefore  natural  that  Babrius 
should  follow  it,  even  if  not,  as  seems  possible,  him- 
self connected  with  Ionia. 

A very  interesting  portion  of  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis's 
preface  is  his  analysis  of  the  ^Lsopian  Fable,  with 
a view  to  establishing  the  indigenous  Greek  origin  of 
this  class  of  compositions  from  a consideration  of  its 
natural  history. 

It  seems  to  have  been  the  peculiarity  of  the 
^Esopian  Fable  to  admit  sometimes  mere  apologues 
(e.g.  F.  ii.  xv.),  sometimes  conversations  between 
gods  and  men  (e.g.  x.  xx.  xxx.) ; but  chiefly  to  intro- 
duce brutes,  or  inanimate  nature,  as  endowed  with 
speech,  for  the  inculcation  of  virtue,  prudence,  or 
political  truth.2 

1 Hipponax  was  an  Ionian,  who  flourished  B.c.  540,  and  Ana- 
nius  about  the  same  period.  See  an  account  of  them  in  Muller 
and  Donaldson’s  Hist.  Gr.  Lit.  vol.  i.  pp.  188 — 91. 

2 “In  the  yEsopean  Fable  the  actions  and  business  of  men 
are  the  real  and  prominent  object,  while  beasts  are  merely  intro- 
duced as  a veil  or  disguise.  It  is  exclusively  the  invention  of 
those  who  detected  in  the  social  habits  of  the  lower  animals  points 


Preface . 


xix 


In  Babrius,  the  chief  interlocutors  are  the  Lion 
and  the  Fox,  especially  the  former,1  who  figures 
as  the  king  of  beasts  with  royal  title  and  prero- 
gatives. And  there  is  abundant  proof  that  the  lion 
was  in  the  earliest  ages  a native  of  the  Peloponese 
as  well  as  of  Northern  Greece.  The  tiger  never 
appears  as  a character  in  ^Esopian  Fable,  though 
incidentally  mentioned  once  or  twice  by  Babrius. 
(P.  I.  Fab.  xcv.  17 — 19;  cii.  7 — 9.)  It  was  un- 
known in  Greece  until  after  the  expedition  of 
Alexander.  The  most  ancient  fable  in  which  it  is 
found  bearing  a part  is  that  of  Avianus  (Fab.  17) 
in  the  fifth  century.  The  spotted  pard,  which 
occurs  once  in  Part  II.  lxxii.  and  incidentally  in 

of  resemblance  with  those  of  man  ; and  while  they  retained  their 
real  character  in  some  respects,  found  means,  by  the  introduction 
of  reason  and  speech,  to  place  them  in  the  light  required  for 
their  purpose.  ” — Muller  and  Donaldson' s Gr.  Lit.  vol.  i.  192. 

1 A strong  argument  against  the  Roman  origin  of  Babrius. 
There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  lion  ever  existed  in  Italy, 
except  when  in  the  Imperial  period  he  was  imported  from  Africa 
for  the  combats  of  the  Amphitheatre.  See  “Lion  in  Greece,” 
G.  C.  L.  Notes  and  Queries,  Vol.  viii.  p.  81,  2d  Series.  “Lion 
in  Italy,’’  Ibid.  p.  282.  See  also  the  Preface  to  Babrius,  pp. 
xxii.  xxiii. 

b 2 


XX 


Preface . 


Part  I.  (Fab.  cii.  8),  is  mentioned  in  Homer,  and 
is  a native  of  Arabia  and  Palestine.  There  seems 
to  have  been,  even  in  later  times,  a constant  con- 
fusion between  the  tiger  and  the  leopard. 

Besides  the  domestic  animals  (the  horse,  ass,  ox, 
goat,  sheep,  dog,  and  cat1),  we  find  the  wolf  and 
the  stag,  and  occasionally  the  bear,  introduced  into 
these  fables.  The  camel  and  the  ape2  appear 
more  rarely,  and  the  sow,  as  an  unclean  beast, 
more  rarely  stilL  There  are  two  instances  of  its 
introduction  in  the  recently  discovered  portion  of 
Babrius.  (Cf.  Part  II.  Fab.  lxxiv.  lxxv.)  The 
elephant  also  only  finds  a place  in  Fable  xli.  of 

1 The  ancients  did  not  distinguish  accurately  between  aX\ovpos, 
“the  cat,”  and  7 aXri,  “the  weasel.”  Cf.  Fab.  xvii.  xxvii.  xxxi. 
xxxii.  cxxi.  ; Part  II.  Fab.  lxvii.  The  same  confusion  occurs  in 
Latin  between  “mustela”  and  “feles.”  Both  annuals  appear 
to  have  been  kept  by  the  ancients  for  the  same  object,  to  kill 
birds  and  mice.  See  Notes  and  Queries,  2d  Series,  Vol.  viii. 
p.  261,  &c.  “Ancient  Names  of  the  Cat.” 

s The  Camel,  Part  I.  xL  lxxx.  ; Part  II.  lxxvii.  The  Ape, 
Part  I.  xxxv.  lvi.  ; Part  II.  xxiii.  and  lxxviii.  In  the  second 
part  we  find  the  hedgehog,  lxxiii.,  the  flea  in  Fab.  xcii.  xciii. 
xdv.,  and  even  a more  unpresentable  insect  is  mentioned  in 
Fab,  lxxxvi 


Preface . 


xxi 


the  second  part.  The  cock,  however,  plays  a very 
conspicuous  part  in  the  H^sopian  Fahle.  (Cf.  v. 
xvii.  cxxi.  cxxiii. ; Part  II.  xvi.)  This  bird  was  a 
very  early  importation  from  Asia  into  Greece,  though 
after  the  time  of  Homer.  (Cf.  Knight’s  Proleg.  to 
Horn.  § 6.) 

On  the  whole,  it  may  be  affirmed  that  though 
Babrius  occasionally  mentions  animals  of  foreign 
extraction,  and  known  only  to  the  later  Greeks, 
yet  he  only  or  chiefly  introduces  those,  as  characters 
in  his  Fables,  which  are  recognised  by  the  earliest 
traditions  of  the  uEsopian  Fables  : a strong  argu- 
ment for  the  European  origin  of  this  class  of 
fiction. 

The  style  of  Babrius  is  justly  described  as  easy, 
pure,  and  elegant.  Neither,  while  it  is  far  from 
being  ornate,  is  it  in  any  degree  bald  or  meagre. 
He  seems  to  have  aimed  at  that  simplicity  and 
clearness  which  are  most  essential  to  the  force  and 
point  of  fable-literature.  His  plots  are,  generally, 
versified  forms  of  the  oral  or  traditional  collections, 
purporting  to  be  those  of  ^Esop.  But  he  here  and 


XXII 


Preface . 


there  apparently  introduces  some  of  his  own  inven- 
tion, or  some  which  are  adapted  from  others.  His 
epimyth,  or  moral,  constantly  differs  from  that  of  the 
parallel  prose  fable  which  has  come  down  to  us; 
a remark  which  suggests  the  question  of  the  genuine- 
ness of  these  epimyths  : into  which,  as  regards  Part 
I,  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis  has  carefully  examined,  in  some 
MSS.  notes,  which  he  has  kindly  communicated  to 
the  translator — the  results  of  which  are  subjoined. 1 

It  now  remains  that  some  notice  should  be  taken 
of  the  second  part  of  Babrius,  edited  in  1859  by 
Sir  G.  C.  Lewis,  from  a transcript  by  M.  Menas  of 
a MS.  on  Mount  Athos ; which,  with  the  original  of 

1 He  divides  the  epimyths  of  Part  I.  into  three  classes,  the 
spurious,  the  doubtful,  and  the  genuine,  as  follows  : — 

Spurious . Fab.  xiii.  xxix.  (v.  5)  xxxiii.  xxxviii.  lii.  lx.  Ixxl 
lxxii.  lxxxii.  lxxxiv.  lxxxv.  (v.  20)  xciv.  (v.  10)  xcvi.  cvii.  cxxix. 

Doubtful.  Fab.  xxi.  xxiv.  xxv.  xliii.  lvi.  lxxxi.  lxxxiii. 

Genuine.  Fab.  iv.  v.  ix.  x.  xi.  xii.  xiv.  xviii.  xxii.  (v.  15)  xxiii. 
xxix.  (v.  6,)  xxxi.  xxxiv.  xxxv.  xxxvi.  xl.  xli.  xliv.  xlvii.  1.  lix. 
lxiv.  lxv.  lxvi.  lxvii.  lxx.  lxxiv.  lxxxv.  (v.  19)  xciv.  (v.  9)  cxvi. 

In  translation,  these  have  generally  been  rendered,  except  in 
one  or  two  instances,  where  it  was  difficult  to  make  any  sense  of 
what  was  evidently  spurious.  It  would  not  be  difficult  to  arrange, 
under  the  three  classes  above,  the  epimyths  of  the  second  part. 


Preface.  xxiii 

the  copy  from  which  the  Parisian  edition  of  1844 
was  printed,  was  purchased  by  the  Trustees  of  the 
British  Museum,  in  1857.  It  has  come,  to  us  in  a 
very  imperfect  state,  and  far  removed  from  its  pris- 
tine form,  both  as  to  metre  and  diction.  Yet  ample 
marks  and  traces"  of  Babrius  remain  in  both  respects, 
traces  which  could  not  be  the  result  of  literary  L 
fraud.  It  appears  that  at  first  there  was  consider- 
able suspicion  of  forgery  with  reference  to  this  MS. 
But  in  the  words  of  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis,  “the  undesigned 
“ coincidences  with  the  prose  Fables  are  beyond  the 
“ skill  of  any  forger.”  “ I have  no  doubt  ” (he  adds) 
“that  the  MS.  of  Menas  was  what  it  professed  to 
“ be,  namely,  a copy  from  a genuine  archetype.”  Such 
is  also  the  opinion  of  other  scholars  who  at  first 
doubted;  and  it  is  one  which  a comparison  of  the 
recovered  Fables  with  the  corresponding  prose  ver- 
sions will  certainly  strengthen  and  confirm. 

The  second  part  of  Babrius  is  edited  by  our 
English  Editor,  more  briefly  than  the  first.  And 
there  are  very  many  sentences  in  its  text,  which 
critical  skill  can  hardly  remedy.  To  translate  such 


XXIV 


Preface. 


is,  perhaps,  a matter  of  ingenuity,  of  which  the 
translator  trusts  that  he  has  not  entirely  fallen  short ; 
though  once  or  twice  he  has  been  obliged  to  omit 
a passage,  of  which  he  could  make  literally  nothing. 

Jn  both  parts  his  great  aim  has  been  to  produce 
a version  which,  while  literal,  should  preserve,  as 
far  as  lay  in  his  power,  the  elegance  and  terse- 
ness of  the  original : a difficult  task,  in  which  he 
can  at  most  hope  to  have  achieved  but  partial 
success.  It  would  be  ungrateful,  before  committing 
the  volume  to  the  public,  to  omit  testifying  to  the 
ready  assistance  and  kindly  encouragement  to  per- 
severe in  a work,  in  some  slight  degree  akin  to 
his  own,  which  he  has  received  throughout  from  the 
distinguished  scholar  and  statesman,  who,  among 
other  titles,  may  claim  that  of  being  the  English 
editor  of  Babrius. 


INDEX 


PART  I. 

PAGE 

Proem  1 3 

Proem  II 4 

I.  The  Archer  and  the  Lion 5 

II.  The  Husbandman  who  had  lost  his  Mattock  . . 6 

III.  The  Goatherd  and  the  She  Goat 7 

IV.  The  Fisherman  and  the  Fish 8 

V.  The  Young  Cocks' 8 

VI.  The  Fisherman  and  the  Little  Fish 9 

VII.  The  Horse  and  the  Ass 10 

VIII.  The  Arab  and  the  Camel 1 1 

IX.  The  Fisherman  Piping 12 

X.  The  Female  Slave  and  Venus 13 

XI.  The  Man  and  the  Fox 14 

XII.  The  Nightingale  and  the  Swallow  ......  15 

XIII.  The  Husbandman  and  the  Stork 16 

XIV.  The  Bear  and  the  Fox 17 

XV.  The  Athenian  and  the  Theban 18 

XVI.  The  Wolf  and  the  Nurse 19 

XVII.  The  Cat  and  the  Cock 20 

XVIII.  The  North  Wind  and  the  Sun 20 

XIX.  The  Fox  and  the  Grapes 21 

XX.  The  Carter  and  Hercules .22 


XXVI 


Index . 


PAGE 

XXI.  The  Oxen  and  the  Butchers 23 

XXII.  The  Grizzled  Man  and  his  Two  Sweethearts  . 24 

XXIII.  The  Drover  that  lost  a Bull 25 

XXIV.  The  Marriage  of  the  Sun 26 

XXV.  The  Hares  and  the  Frogs 27 

XXVI.  The  Farmer  and  the  Cranes 2 8 

XXVII.  The  Captured  Weasel 29 

XXVIII.  The  Ox  and  the  Toad 29 

XXIX.  The  Aged  Horse 30 

XXX.  The  Sculptor  and  Mercury 31 

XXXI.  The  Cats  and  Mice 31 

XXXII.  The  Cat  and  Venus 33 

XXXIII.  The  Farmer  and  the  Starlings 33 

XXXIV.  The  Boy  eating  the  Entrails  ......  3 5 

XXXV.  The  Monkeys . 36 

XXXVI.  The  Oak  and  the  Reed 36 

XXXVII.  The  Heifer  and  the  Bull 37 

XXXVIII.  The  Pine 38 

XXXIX.  The  Dolphins  and  the  Crab 39 

XL.  Omitted. 

XLI.  The  Lizard 39 

XLII.  The  Dog  and  the  Cook 40 

XLIII.  The  Stag  and  the  Hunters 40 

XLIV.  The  Bulls  and  the  Lion 42 

XLV.  The  Goatherd  and  the  Goats 42 

XLVI.  The  Sick  Stag 43 

XL VII.  The  Old  Farmer  and  his  Sons 44 

XLVIII.  Omitted. 

XLIX.  The  Workman  and  Fortune * 45 

L.  The  Fox  and  the  Woodcutter 46 

LI.  The  Widow  and  the  Sheep 47 

LIL  The  Driver  and  the  Waggon 48 


Index.  xxvii 

PAGE 

LIII.  The  Wolf  and  the  Fox 48 

LIV.  Omitted. 

LV.  The  Ox  and  the  Ass 49 

LVI.  Jupiter  and  the  Monkey 50 

LVII.  Mercury’s  Wagon  and  the  Arabs 51 

LVIII.  Jove’s  Cask 52 

LIX.  Jupiter,  Neptune,  Minerva,  and  Momus  . . . 52 

LX.  The  Mouse  that  fell  into  the  Pot 54 

LXI.  The  Hunter  and  the  Fisherman 54 

LXII.  The  Mule 55 

LXIII.  The  Hero  (or  Daemon) 56 

LXIV.  The  Fir-tree  and  the  Bramble 57 

LXV.  The  Crane  and  the  Peacock 58 

LX VI.  The  Man  with  Two  Wallets 58 

LXVII.  T.he  Wild  Ass  and  the  Lion 59 

LX VIII.  Apollo  and  Jupiter 60 

LXIX.  The  Hare  and  the  Hound 61 

LXX.  The  Marriages  of  the  Gods 61 

LXXI.  The  Husbandman  and  the  Sea 62 

LXXII.  The  Birds  and  the  Jackdaw 63 

LXXIII.  The  Kite 64 

LXXIV.  The  Man,  the  Horse,  the  Ox,  and  the  Dog . . 65 

LXXV.  The  Unskilful  Physician 66 

LXXVI.  The  Knight  and  his  Charger 67 

LXXVII.  The  Fox  and  the  Crow 68 

LXXVIII.  The  Sick  Crow 69 

LXXIX.  The  Dog  and  the  Shadow 70 

LXXX.  The  Camel 70 

LXXXI.  The  Fox  and  the  Monkey 71 

LXXXII.  The  Lion  and  the  Fox 71 

LXXXIII.  The  Horse  and  the  Groom 72 

LXXXI V.  The  Gnat  and  the  Bull 73 


xxviii  Index . 

PAGE 

LXXXV.  The  Dogs  and  the  Wolves 73 

LXXXVI.  The  Swollen  Fox 75 

LXXXVII.  The  Dog  and  the  Hare  . , 76 

LXXXVIII.  The  Lark  and  its  Young 76 

LXXXIX.  The  Wolf  and  the  Lamb 78 

XC.  The  Lion  and  the  Fawn 79 

XCI.  The  Bull  and  the  Goat 79 

XCII.  The  timid  Hunter 80 

XCIII.  The  Wolves  and  the  Sheep 81 

XCIV.  The  Wolf  and  the  Heron 82 

XCV.  The  Sick  Lion 83 

XCVI.  The  Wolf  and  the  Young  Ram 88 

XCVII.  The  Lion  and  the  Bull 88 

XCVIII.  The  Lion  Wooer 89 

XCIX.  The  Wolf  and  the  Dog  .......  90 

C.  The  Lion  and  the  Eagle 91 

CI.  The  Wolf  and  the  Fox 92 

CII.  The  Lion  ruling  justly 92 

CIII.  The  Sick  Lion  and  the  Wild  Beasts  . . . 93 

CIV.  The  Dog  bearing  the  Bell 95 

CV.  The  Wolf  and  the  Lion 95 

CVI.  The  Gentle  Lion 96 

CVII.  The  Lion  and  the  Mouse 98 

CVIII.  The  Country  Mouse  and  Town  Mouse  ...  99 

CIX.  The  Crab  and  its  Mother 101 

CX.  The  Dog  and  his  Master loi 

CXI.  The  Ass  carrying  Salt 102 

CXII.  The  Mouse  and  the  Bull  . 103 

CXIII.  The  Shepherd  and  the  Dog 104 

CXIV.  The  Lamp 104 

CXV.  The  Tortoise  and  the  Eagle 105 

CXVI.  The  Husband  and  the  Gallant  . . . . .106 


Index. 


xxix 


PAGE 


CXVII.  The  Man  and  Mercury 107 

CXVIII.  The  Swallow  that  dwelt  near  the  Judges  . . 108 

CXIX.  The  Image  of  Mercury 109 

CXX.  The  Frog  Physician no 

CXXI.  The  Hen  and  the  Cat .110 

CXXII.  The  Ass  and  the  Wolf hi 

CXXJII.  The  Hen  that  laid  Golden  Eggs 112 

CXXI V.  The  Traveller  and  Truth 113 

CXXV.  The  Ass  and  the  Lap-dog 114 

CXXVI.  The  Playful  Ass 116 

CXX VII.  The  Fowler,  Partridge,  and  Cock  ....  116 

CXX VIII.  Jupiter  the  Judge 118 

CXXIX.  The  Ant  and  the  Grasshopper 119 

Fragment  I.  The  Sheep  and  Shepherd 120 


PART  II. 


I.  Proem 123 

II.  The  Lark  burying  its  Father 124 

III.  VEsop  in  a Dockyard 125 

IV.  The  Eagle  and  the  Man 126 

~»V.  The  Goat  and  the  Vine 127 

VI.  The  Lion  and  the  Man 127 

VII.  The  Swan  and  the  Goose 128 

VIII.  The  Frogs 129 

IX.  The  Frogs  asking  a King 130 

X.  The  Archer  and  the  Eagle  . . . ...  . . 132 

XI.  The  Oxen  and  the  Wagon  . 133 


XXX 


Index . 


PAGE 

XII.  The  Frogs 133 

XIII.  The  Vagrant  Priests  of  Cybele 134 

XIV.  The  Husbandman  and  the  Eagle . . . . . 136 

XV.  The  Husbandman  and  Fortune 137 

XVI.  The  Woman  and  her  Maidservants  ....  138 

XVII.  The  Wizard  Woman 139 

XVIII.  The  Old  Woman  and  the  Doctor  ....  140 

XIX.  The  Dogs  and  the  Fox 142 

XX.  The  Dragon  and  the  Eagle 143 

XXI.  The  Bees  and  the  Shepherd  ......  144 

XXII.  The  Shipwreck’d  Man  and  the  Sea  . . . '.  145 

XXIII.  The  Fox  and  the  Monkey 146 

XXIV.  Jupiter,  Prometheus,  Pallas,  and  Momus  . . 147 

XXV.  The  Trumpeter 148 

XXVI.  Hercules  and  Pallas 149 

XXVII.  Hercules  and  Plutus 150 

XXVIII.  The  Apple-tree,  Pomegranate,  and  Bramble  . 15 1 

XXIX.  The  Travellers  and  the  Crow 152 

XXX.  The  Kite  and  the  Snake 153 

XXXI.  Lies  and  Truth 153 

XXXII.  The  Lion  and  the  Goat 156 

XXXIII.  The  Crow  and  the  Swan 157 

XXXIV.  The  Dog  and  the  Cockle 158 

XXXV.  The  Bull,  the  Lioness,  and  the  Wild  Boar.  . 158 

XXXVI.  The  Gnat  and  the  Lion 159 

XXXVII.  The  Swallow  and  the  Crow 160 

XXXVIII.  The  Gull  and  the  Kite 161 

XXXIX.  The  Horse  and  the  Stag 162 

XL.  The  Lion,  the  Wolf,  and  the  Fox  . . . . 163 

XLI.  The  Lion,  Prometheus,  and  the  Elephant . . 165 

XLII.  The  Peacock  and  the  Crane  . . . . . . 167 

XLIII.  The  Wolf  and  the  Ass 168 


Index . 


XXXI 


PAGE 

XLIV.  The  Wolf  and  the  Lion 169 

XLV.  The  Wolf  and  the  Sheep 170 

XLVI.  The  Jackdaw  and  the  Crows 1 7 1 

XLVII.  The  Flies 172 

XLVIII.  The  Moon  and  its  Mother 172 

XLIX.  The  Mouse  and  the  Frog 173 

L.  The  Spendthrift  and  the  Swallow 174 

LI.  See  Part  I.  128 175 

LII.  See  Part  I.  124 175 

LIII.  The  Sheep  and  the  Dog.  (See  I.  Fragment  I.)  175 

LIV.  See  Part  I.  125 177 

LV.  The  Ass  and  the  Fox 177 

LVI.  The  Ass  wearing  the  Lion’s  Skin 178 

LVII.  An  Ass  carrying  an  Image 179 

LVIII.  The  Birdcatcher  and  the  Lark 180 

LIX.  The  Tail  and  Members  of  a Serpent  . . . . 181 

LX.  The  Farmer  and  the  Serpent 182 

LXI.  The  Boy  hunting  Locusts 183 

LXII.  The  Young  Thief  and  His  Mother 184 

LXIII.  The  Cockles . . 185 

LXIV.  Prometheus  and  Mankind.  .......  186 

LXV.  The  Thirsty  Pigeon 187 

LX VI.  The  Man  and  the  Partridge 188 

LX VII.  The  Bat  and  the  Cat 189 

LX VIII.  The  Tortoise  and  the  Hare 190 

LXIX.  The  Rose  and  the  Amaranth 19 1 

LXX.  The  Sl|jjpherd  and  the  Wolf 192 

LXXI.  The  Olive  and  the  Fig-tree 194 

LXXII.  The  Pard  and  the  Fox 195 

LXXIII.  The  Fox  and  the  Hedgehog 195 

LXXIV.  The  Sow  and  the  Bitch 197 

LXXV.  The  Sow  and  the  Bitch 197 


xxxii  Index . 

PAGE 

LXXVI.  Goods  and  Evils 199 

/_,  LXXV, II.  The  Camel  and  Jupiter 200 

LXXVIII.  The  Dancing  Monkeys 200 

LXXIX.  The  Fox  and  the  Goat 201 

LXXX.  The  Bees  and  Jupiter 203 

LXXXI.  The  Son  and  the  Father 204 

LXXXII.  The  Wild  Boar  and  the  Fox 205 

LXXXIII.  The  Lioness  and  the  Beasts 206 

LXXXIV.  The  Bald  Rider 207 

LXXXV.  The  Crane  and  the  Fox 208 

LXXXVI.  The  Husbandman  and  the  Lice 209 

LXXXVII.  The  Brazier  and  His  Dog 210 

LXXXVIII.  The  Husbandman  and  the  Viper  . . . . 21 1 

LXXXIX.  Winter  and  Spring 212 

XC.  The  Swallows  and  the  Swans 213 

XCI.  The  Two  Pots 216 

XCII.  The  Flea  and  the  Wrestler 217 

XCIII.  The  Flea  and  the  Man 218 

XCIV.  The  Flea  and  the  Ox 219 

XCV.  The  Ass’s  Shadow 220 

Notes  221 


■n 


THE 

FABLES  OF  BABRIUS. 


B 


9^ 


PROEM  I. 


^-pHE  race  of  just  men  flourish’d  first,  of  old ; 

Its  name,  son  Branchus,  was  the  “ age  of  gold.” 


Third  after  these  was  born  a brazen  race, 

And  next  the  god-sprung  heroes  found  their  place  ; 
Fifth  came  a stock  depraved,  an  iron  root. 

But  ’twas  the  Golden  age,  when  every  brute 
Had  voice  articulate,  in  speech  was  skill’d, 

And  the  mid-forests  with  its  synods  fill’d. 

The  tongues  of  rock  and  pine-leaf  then  were  free  ; 
To  ship  and  sailor  then  would  speak  the  sea ; 
Sparrows  with  farmers  would  shrewd  talk  maintain  ; 
Earth  gave  all  fruits,  nor  ask’d  for  toil  again. 
Mortals  and  gods  were  wont  to  mix  as  friends. 

To  which  conclusion  all  the  teaching  tends 
Of  sage  old  ./Esop  ; him,  to  whom  belong 
Fables  set  forth  in  free,  outspoken  song. 

These  should  a place  in  thy  remembrance  get ; 
Therefore  for  thee  this  honeycomb  I set, 

Desirous,  as  I hive  it,  to  assuage 
The  harsh  Iambic’s  bitterness  and  rage. 


B 2 


4 


The  Fables  of  Babrius „ 


PROEM  IL 

The  Fable,  royal  Alexander’s  son ! 

Is  a device  by  Syrians  old  begun. 

Belus  and  Ninus  ruled,  when  it  was  young. 

And  clever  ^Esop  to  th’  Hellenic  tongue 
Gave  fables  first.  The  like  Cybisas  spake 
To  Libyans.  I,  in  mine,  old  forms  forsake, 

And,  with  gold  cheek-piece  bitting  fiery  horse, 
Commend  my  mythiambic  to  the  course. 

Yet  I no  sooner  had  unbarr’d  the  door, 

Than  others  enter’d.  Theirs  the  Muse  to  soar 
In  griffin-like  productions,  over-wise ; 

Tho’  past  mine  own  their  knowledge  doth  not  rise. 
Now  I in  simple  speech  my  fables  set, 

Nor  care  the  famed  Iambic’s  teeth  to  whet. 

Rather  to  dull  their  edge,  to  soothe  their  stings, 
Aims  he,  who  now  this  second  volume  sings. 


FABLE  I. 

THE  ARCHER  AND  THE  LION. 

(p.  F.  403.) 

A skilful  archer  the  hill  country  sought, 

Intent  on  sport.  His  coming  quickly  brought 
To  every  wild  beast  fear  and  headlong  flight. 

The  lion  only  tarried  to  invite 

The  archer’s  onslaught.  “ Haste  not ! Prythee  stay,” 

The  stranger  said  ; “ nor  hope  to  win  the  day. 

“ Learn  from  mine  envoy,  whom  you  soon  shall  meet, 
“ Your  wisest  plan.”  Forth  sped  his  arrow  fleet 
From  no  great  distance ; and  was  buried  deep 
In  the  beast’s  flank.  Afraid  his  post  to  keep 
The  wounded  lion  straight  essay’d  to  fly 
To  where  the  lonesome  woodland  thickets  lie. 

But,  lo  ! a fox  was  standing  at  his  side, 

Who  urg’d  him  still  the  archer’s  shafts  to  bide. 

“ Not  so  !”  the  lion  said  ; “ beguile  not  me  1 
“ Yon  envoy  came  but  now  so  bitterly, 

“ That  doubly  fierce  his  master  needs  must  be.” 


6 


The  Fables  of  Bahrius . 


II. 

THE  HUSBANDMAN  WHO  HAD  LOST  HIS 
MATTOCK. 

Trenching  his  vineyard  once  a husbandman 
His  mattock  lost ; and  to  inquire  began. 

If  it  had  gone  by  any  workman's  theft. 

But  each  denied.  When  no  resource  was  left. 

To  put  them  on  their  oaths,  he  took  them  all 
Up  to  the  city.  ’Tis  our  wont  to  call 
The  country  gods  poor  folks  : but  those  who  dwell 
In  walls,  we  deem,  are  true,  and  order  well. 

Now  in  a fountain  in  the  foregate  street 
The  party  stay’d  to  rest,  and  wash’d  their  feet. 

Just  then  the  crier  rich  rewards  was  telling 
To  him  who’d  show  who  robb’d  the  sacred  dwelling. 
The  farmer  heard,  and  said,  “ My  journey's  vain  1 
(C  If  the  god  knows  not,  who  has  robbed  his  fane, 
u And  but  from  men,  for  bribes,  the  news  receives, 

“ How  can  he  know,  or  find  out,  other  thieves  \ ” 


The  Fables  of  Bab rius. 


7 


III. 

THE  GOATHERD  AND  THE  SHE  GOAT 
(p.  F.  17.) 

A goatherd  wish’d  to  gather  home  his  flock  ; 

Some  came ; some  tarried ; on  a cleft  of  rock 
The  fragrant  shoots  of  mastich  and  goatsrue 
One  she-goat  into  disobedience  drew. 

Quickly  the  hireling  lifted  up  a stone, 

Which  brake  her  horn,  tho’  from  a distance  thrown. 
And  now  he  sued  her  : “ Goat  and  fellow-slave, 

“ By  Pan,  the  patron  of  these  glens,  I crave, 

“ Do  not  thou  to  my  lord  this  act  proclaim, 

“ I meant  not  that  the  stone  should  take  good  aim." 
“ Nay,  how,”  said  she,  “ a plain  fact  can  I hide  ] 

“ My  horn  is  telltale,  tho’  my  tongue  be  tied." 


8 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


IV. 

THE  FISHERMAN  AND  THE  FISH. 

(P.  F.  2 6.) 

His  late-cast  net  ashore  a fisher  drew, 
Enclosing  fish,  not  all  alike  nor  few ; 

The  smaller,  taking  flight,  contrived  to  get 
Safe  through  the  bottom  of  the  meshy  net, 
Whilst  in  the  ship  the  greater  emptied  lay. 

’Tis  surely  safe,  and  farthest  from  harm's  way, 
To  be  but  small : for  you  shall  seldom  see 
The  high  in  rank  escape  calamity. 

V. 

THE  YOUNG  COCKS. 

(p.  F.  21.) 

Two  Tanagraean  cocks  a fight  began ; 

Their  spirit  is,  ’tis  said,  as  that  of  man  ; 

Of  these  the  beaten  bird,  a mass  of  blows, 
For  shame  into  a corner  creeping  goes ; 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 

The  other  to  the  housetop  quickly  flew, 

And  there  in  triumph  flapp’d  his  wings,  and  crew. 
But  him  an  eagle  lifted  from  the  roof, 

And  bore  away.  His  fellow  gain’d  a proof 
That  oft  the  wages  of  defeat  are  best, 

None  else  remain’d  the  hens  to  interest. 

Wherefore,  O man,  beware  of  boastfulness, 

Should  fortune  lift  thee,  others  to  depress,  > 
Many  are  saved  by  lack  of  her  caress. 


VI. 

THE  FISHERMAN  AND  THE  LITTLE  FISH. 

(p.  F.  28.) 

A fisherman,  who  all  the  seashore  drain’d, 

While  he  with  slender  rod  sweet  life  maintain’d, 
Once  caught  with  horsehair  line  a tiny  fish, 
Ill-suited  for  the  frying-pan  or  dish. 

The  gasping  fish  its  captor  thus  besought  : 

“ What  am  I worth  ? For  what  shall  I be  bought  \ 


10 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


“ I’m  not  half-grown  ! whom  on  yon  rocky  shore 
“ My  mother  in  the  sea-weed  lately  bore. 

“ Now  let  me  go ; oh,  kill  me  not  in  vain, 

“ And  you  shall  catch  me  when  you  come  again, 

“ On  sea-weed  food  ere  then  grown  large  and  fine, 

“ And  meet  to  grace  a board,  where  rich  men  dine.’7 
As  thus  she  prayed,  she  raised  a piteous  moan 
And  panted  much ; but  the  old  man  was  stone. 

Vain  was  her  hope  with  winning  words  to  plead  ; 
He  said,  while  piercing  her  with  ruthless  reed  : 

“ Who  holds  not  fast  a small  but  certain  prize, 

“ Is  but  a fool,  to  seek  uncertainties.” 


VII. 

THE  HORSE  AND  THE  ASS. 

(p.  f.  177.) 

A man,  who  kept  a horse,  along  the  way 
Unladen  used  to  lead  him,  and  to  lay 
His  burden  on  an  aged  ass,  who  groaned, 
And  coming  to  the  horse  his  fate  bemoaned. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


“ Wouldst  thou  but  share  my  load,  I might  survive, 
Said  he,  “ but  else  I sha’n’t  be  long  alive/7 
“ Move  on,”  the  other  cried  ; “ don’t  worry  me  ! ” 
The  ass  crept  on  reproved ; and  presently 
Sank  under  toil,  and  died  as  he  had  said  ; 

His  master  therefore  set  the  horse  instead 
Beside  him,  shifted  all  the  weight,  and  laid 
This  and  the  ass’s  skin,  when  it  was  flay’d, 

With  all  its  trappings,  on  the  horse’s  back  : 

He  cried,  “ Ah,  ill  advised  ! alack,  alack ! 

“ I would  not  bear  a part,  however  small  j 
“ And  now  constraint  hath  laid  upon  me  all/’ 


VIII 

THE  ARAB  AND  THE  CAMEL, 

(p.  f.  68 . ) 

An  Arab,  having  heap’d  his  camel’s  back, 
Ask’d  if  he  chose  to  take  the  upward  track 
Or  downward  ; and  the  beast  had  sense  to  say, 
“ Am  I cut  off  then  from  the  level  way  % ” 


12 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


IX. 

THE  FISHERMAN  PIPING. 

(P.  F.  27.) 

A fisher  play’d  the  pipes  with  wondrous  skill, 
And  hoping  shoals  of  fish,  of  their  own  will, 
Would  to  the  sweet  sound  of  his  piping  throng, 
Let  down  his  net,  and  piped  a tuneful  song. 

But  when  his  breath  was  spent,  his  piping  nought, 
He  cast  again,  and  fish  in  numbers  caught. 

These  panting  here  and  there  ashore  he  spied, 
And,  as  he  wash’d  his  net,  thus  sharply  cried  : 

“ Dance  without  music  now  ! Had  ye  been  wise, 

“ Ye  had  before  danced  to  my  melodies.” 

Indifference  is  oft  a losing  game  ; 

But  when  you  catch  the  prize,  at  which  you  aim, 
Then  is  your  time  to  ridicule  and  blame.  J 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


i3 


X. 

THE  FEMALE  SLAVE  AND  VENDS. 

A man,  enamour’d  of  his  ugly  slave, 

An  arrant  slut,  to  her  for  asking  gave 

Whate’er  she  would.  Hence,  as  more  gauds  she  wins, 

And  trails  fine  purple  o’er  her  slattern  shins, 

At  wife  and  mistress  she  defiance  flings  ; 

But  Venus,  as  the  cause  of  these  good  things, 

With  lamps  she  fain  would  honour,  and  each  day 
Make  offering,  supplicate,  pay  vows,  and  pray  ; 

Till  to  her  came  the  goddess,  in  her  sleep, 

And,  while  the  house  was  hush’d  in  slumber  deep, 
Said,  “ Thank  me  not,  as  tho’  I’d  made  thee  fair ; 

“ To  him  that  thinks  thee  so,  a hate  I bear.” 

Whoso  in  what  is  foul  can  beauty  find, 

Is  surely  God-abhorr’d,  and  halt  in  mind. 


*4 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


XI. 

THE  MAN  AND  THE  FOX . 

(p.  f.  6 1.) 

A man,  that  on  his  vines7  and  orchards7  foe, 

The  fox,  a strange  affront  design'd  to  throw, 
Bandag’d  its  tail  with  tow,  applied  a light, 

And  sent  it  forth.  Now  Heaven’s  just  oversight 
Led  the  flame-bearer  to  its  captor’s  fields ; 

It  was  the  time  for  crops,  when  harvest  yields 
A hopeful  prospect  of  abundant  share  ; 

The  man  pursued,  deploring  wasted  care  ; 

And  Ceres  did  not  bless  his  threshing-floor. 

One  should  be  meek,  and  ne’er  be  vexed  sore. 
Anger  a vengeance  worth  avoidance  hath, 

That  bringeth  damage  to  the  quick-to-wrath. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


i5 


XII. 

THE  NIGHTINGALE  AND  THE  SWALLOW. 

(P.  F.  10.) 

Far  from  men’s  fields  the  swallow  forth  had  flown, 
When  she  espied  amid  the  woodlands  lone 
The  nightingale,  sweet  songstress.  Her  lament 
Was  Itys  to  his  doom  untimely  sent. 

Each  knew  the  other  through  the  mournful  strain, 

Flew  to  embrace,  and  in  sweet  talk  remain. 

Then  said  the  swallow,  “ Dearest,  liv’st  thou  still  ? 
a Ne’er  have  I seen  thee,  since  thy  Thracian  ill. 

“ Some  cruel  fate  hath  ever  come  between  ; 

“ Our  virgin  lives  till  now  apart  have  been. 

“ Come  to  the  fields  : revisit  homes  of  men  : 

“ Come  dwell  with  me,  a comrade  dear,  again, 

“ Where  thou  shalt  charm  the  swains,  no  savage  brood 
“ Dwell  near  men’s  haunts,  and  quit  the  open  wood  : 
“ One  roof,  one  chamber,  sure,  can  house  the  two, 

Or  dost  prefer  the  nightly  frozen  dew, 


1 6 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


a And  day-god’s  heat  h a wild-wood  life  and  drear  1 
“ Come,  clever  songstress,  to  the  light  more  near.” 
To  whom  the  sweet-voiced  nightingale  replied  : 

“ Still  on  these  lonesome  ridges  let  me  bide  ; 

“ Nor  seek  to  part  me  from  the  mountain  glen ; 

“ I shun,  since  Athens,  man,  and  haunts  of  men ; 
“To  mix  with  them,  their  dwelling  place  to  view, 

“ Stirs  up  old  grief,  and  opens  woes  anew.” 

Some  consolation  for  an  evil  lot 

Lies  in  wise  words,  in  song,  in  crowds  forgot. 

But  sore  the  pang,  when,  where  you  once  were  great, 
Again  men  see  you,  housed  in  mean  estate. 


XIII. 

THE  HUSBANDMAN  AND  THE  STORK . 

(P.  F.  IOO.) 

Thin  nets  a farmer  o’er  his  furrows  spread, 

And  caught  the  cranes  that  on  his  tillage  fed  : 
And  him  a limping  stork  began  to  pray, 

Who  fell  with  them  into  the  farmer’s  way : 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


i7 


“ I am  no  crane  : I don’t  consume  the  grain  : 

“ That  I’m  a stork  is  from  my  colour  plain  ; 

“ A stork,  than  which  no  better  bird  doth  live  : 

“ I to  my  father  aid  and  succour  give.” 

The  man  replied  : “ Good  stork,  I cannot  tell 
“ Your  ways  of  life  : but  this  I know  full  well, 

“ I caught  you  with  the  spoilers  of  my  seed  : 

“ With  them,  with  whom  I found  you,  you  must  bleed.” 

Walk  with  the  bad,  and  hate  will  be  as  strong 
’Gainst  you  as  them,  e’en  though  you  no  man  wrong. 


XIV. 

THE  BEAR  AND  THE  FOX. 

(p.  F.  69.) 

A bear  for  man  was  boasting  fondness  rare, 

Whose  corpse,  he  urged,  he  was  not  wont  to  tear. 
To  whom  quoth  Reynard,  “Were  the  choice  my 
own, 

“ You  should  tear  corpses,  but  let  life  alone ; 

“ Let  none  that  hurt  my  life,  my  death  bemoan.” 


c 


1 8 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XV. 

THE  A THENIAN  AND  THE  THEBAN. 
(P.  F.  50.) 

A Theban  and  Athenian  took  one  road, 

And  thence,  no  marvel,  conversation  flow’d. 
They  came  to  speak  of  heroes,  in  their  walk, 
And,  after  other  long  and  needless  talk, 

The  Theban  fain  Alcmena’s  son  would  prove 
Greatest  of  men,  and  now  of  gods  above. 

TIT  Athenian  argued,  that  far  nobler  fate 
Was  that  of  Theseus,  so  divine  his  state, 
Compared  with  Herc’les  and  his  servile  lot  : 

And  soon  the  wordy  talker  victory  got. 

The  other,  Theban-like,  in  words  outmatch’d, 
Thus,  with  rough  wit,  the  argument  despatch’d  : 

“ There  : you  prevail ! So  then  may  we  displease 
“ Theseus  : and  you  Athenians  Hercules  !” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


i 


XVI. 

THE  WOLF  AND  THE  NURSE. 

(P.  F.  275.) 

A country  nurse,  to  fright  her  babe  to  peace, 

Said,  “ Wolf  shall  have  thee,  or  thy  cries  must  cease. 
The  wolf  overheard,  believed  the  scolding  crone, 
And  stay’d  in  hopes  to  find  the  feast  his  own. 

But  evening  came  ; the  babe  was  hush’d  to  rest  : 
The  wolf  still  gaped,  with  rav’ning  hunger  prest. 

At  last  his  hopes  to  utter  dulness  grew  : 

Then  to  his  anxious  helpmate  he  withdrew. 

“ How  cam’st  thou  empty  V 9 said  she.  He  replied, 
“ Because  upon  a female  I relied.” 


20 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XVII. 

THE  CAT  AND  THE  COCK. 

(p.  f.  15.) 

A cat  that  ambush’d  for  some  house-birds  lay, 
Swung  itself,  baglike,  from  a peg  one  day. 

’Twas  seen  by  a sagacious  shrewd-tongued  cock, 
Which  shrilly  thus  began  the  cat  to  mock ; 

“Full  many  bags  I’ve  noticed  heretofore  : 

“ But  none  the  grinders  of  a live  cat  bore.” 


XVIII. 

THE  NORTH  WIND  AND  THE  SUN 
(p.  f.  82.) 

Betwixt  the  North  wind  and  the  Sun  arose 
A contest,  which  would  soonest  of  his  clothes 
Strip  a wayfaring  clown,  so  runs  the  tale. 

First  Boreas  blows  an  almost  Thracian  gale, 
Thinking  perforce  to  steal  the  man’s  capote  r 
He  loos’d  it  not  : but  as  the  cold  wind  smote 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


21 


More  sharply,  tighter  round  him  drew  the  folds, 
And  sheltered  by  a crag  his  station  holds. 

But  now  the  Sun  at  first  peer’d  gently  forth, 

And  thaw’d  the  chills  of  the  uncanny  north ; 
Then  in  their  turn  his  beams  more  amply  plied, 
Till  sudden  heat  the  clown’s  endurance  tried  : 
Stripping  himself,  away  his  cloak  he  flung  : 

The  Sun  from  Boreas  thus  a triumph  wrung. 

The  fable  means,  “ My  son,  at  mildness  aim  : 
Persuasion  more  results  than  force  may  claim.” 


XIX. 

THE  FOX  AND  THE  GRAPES. 

(p.  F-  33*) 

There  hung  some  bunches  of  the  purple  grape 
On  a hill-side.  A cunning  fox,  agape 
For  these  full  clusters,  many  times  essay’d 
To  cull  their  dark  bloom,  many  vain  leaps  made. 


22 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


They  were  quite  ripe,  and  for  the  vintage  fit ; 
But  when  his  leaps  did  not  avail  a whit, 

He  journey’d  on,  and  thus  his  grief  composed  : 
“ The  bunch  was  sour,  not  ripe,  as  I supposed.” 


XX. 

THE  CARTER  AND  HERCULES. 

(p.  F.  81.) 

A carter  from  the  village  drove  his  wain  : 

And  when  it  fell  into  a rugged  lane, 

Inactive  stood,  nor  lent  a helping  hand  ; 

But  to  that  God,  whom  of  the  heavenly  band 
He  really  honour’d  most,  Alcides,  pray’d  : 

“ Push  at  your  wheels,”  the  God  appearing  said, 

“ And  goad  your  team  ; but,  when  you  pray  again, 
“ Help  yourself  likewise,  or  you’ll  pray  in  vain.” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


2 


XXL 

THE  OXEN  AND  THE  BUTCHERS. 

(p.  f.  80. ) 

Some  oxen  wish’d  the  butcher  tribe  to  kill, 

Who  boasted  a to  them  destructive  skill. 

But  when  they  met,  and  now  for  direful  fray 
Whetted  their  horns,  an  ox  of  ancient  day 
Among  them,  who  for  years  had  borne  the  plough, 
Said,  “ These  at  least  have  hands  experienced,  how 
“ To  kill  and  carve  us,  not  to  hack  and  hew  : 

“ But  if  we  chance  on  men  to  slaughter  new, 

“ We  shall  die  twice.  One  will  not  lack  to  fell 
“ The  ox,  but  one  perhaps  to  do  it  well.” 

A man  in  haste  from  present  woes  to  flee 
Should  see  his  path  from  worse  disaster  free. 


24 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XXII. 

THE  GRIZZLED  MAN  AND  HIS  TWO  SWEET- 
HEARTS. 

(p.  f.  56.) 

A man  on  whom  mid-age  its  mark  had  set, — 

He  was  no  longer  young,  nor  old  as  yet, — 

Was  wont  to  brush  his  black  hair  mixt  with  grey, 

And  then  in  Love’s  sweet  revels  spend  his  day. 

He  wooed  two  loves,  a young  one  and  an  old  ; 

The  young  one  was  desirous  to  behold 
Her  lover  youthful.  Age  would  mate  with  age. 
Hence  evermore  the  damsel  strove  to  wage 
War  against  each  grey  hair  she  chanc’d  to  find  : 

The  elder  tried  to  leave  no  black  behind  ; 

Till  each  in  turn,  by  plucking  out  his  hair, 

Young  love  and  old,  had  left  him  bald  and  bare. 

Woe  worth  the  man  entrapp’d  by  woman’s  lure, 

For  such  are  ever  pluck’d  and  stripp’d,  be  sure. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XXIII. 

THE  DROVER  THAT  LOST  A BULL. 

(p.  F.  83.) 

To  a far  forest  for  a bull  that  stray’d, 

A well-horn’d  beast,  a drover  quest  had  made. 
Then  to  the  mountain  nymphs  and  gods  around, 
Hermes  and  Pan,  he  sware,  in  case  he  found 
The  thief,  a lamb  should  fall  a sacrifice. 

Crossing  a hill,  his  noble  bull  he  spies 
Feasting  a lion.  Then  he  vows  in  grief, 

To  add  an  ox,  if  he  escape  the  thief. 

Hence,  it  would  seem,  this  lesson  we  are  taught, 
Not  to  uplift  a vow  devoid  of  thought, 

By  instant  trouble’s  pressure  overwrought. 


26 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


XXIV. 

THE  MARK  I AGE  OF  THE  SUN. 

(p.  f.  77.) 

The  Sun’s  espousals  were  at  summer’s  prime, 
Hence  all  the  beasts  enjoy’d  a jovial  time. 

The  frogs  too  led  the  dance  in  marsh  and  mere, 
Till  a toad  check’d  them,  saying,  “ Nought  is  here 
“ To  call  for  joy,  but  rather  grief  and  moan, 

“ For  if  he  dries  each  spring,  while  yet  alone, 

“ How  by  this  union  are  we  not  undone, 

“ If  like  himself  he  should  beget  a son  ? ” 

Many  o’er  trifles  needlessly  exult, 

From  which  too  often  sorrow  will  result 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


27 


XXV, 

THE  HATES  AND  THE  FROGS. 

(p.  f.  237.} 

To  end  their  days  the  hares  made  up  their  mind, 

And  since  they  were  of  beasts  the  feeblest  kind, 

Timid  of  heart,  and  dull  in  all  but  flight, 

To  hide  themselves  in  some  dark  pool  from  light. 

But  as  to  a broad  swamp  they  drew  more  near, 

Upon  its  margin  hosts  of  frogs  appear, 

Which  into  slimy  depths  affrighted  leap. 

As  the  hares  paused,  one  said,  “ Your  courage  keep.  ^ 

“ Let  us  return  ! To  die  we  need  not  seek,  > 

“ For  here  are  others  than  ourselves  more  weak,” 


28 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XXVI. 

THE  FARMER  AND  THE  CRANES. 

(p.  F.  93.) 

A farmer’s  land,  fresh  sown  with  wheaten  grain, 

Was  being  wasted  by  the  hurtful  crane. 

Long  did  the  farmer  lift  an  empty  sling, 

By  fear  alone  their  troop  discomfiting. 

But  when  they  found  he  only  smote  the  air, 

To  fly  at  his  approach  they  did  not  care  : 

* •*» 

Till  he  no  longer  made  a feint  to  throw. 

But  laid  with  stones  the  greater  number  low. 
Quitting  the  corn,  the  rest  began  to  cry, 

“ Come,  to  the  land  of  pygmies  let  us  fly. 

“ This  man,  it  seems,  content  no  more  with  fright, 
“ Is  now  beginning  to  put  forth  his  might.” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


29 


XXVII. 

THE  CAPTURED  WEASEL. 

(p.  f.  89.) 

A man  had  trapp’d  a weasel,  which  to  drown, 

He  in  a water-vessel  tied  it  down. 

But  when  she  said,  “ How  shamefully  my  aid 
In  catching  mice  and  lizards  have  you  paid  ! ” 

“I  own  the  debt,”  cried  he;  “but  did  not  you 
“ Stifle  each  bird,  and  rob  each  dwelling  too, 

“ And  empty  every  meat-pot  ? You  shall  die  ! 

“ For  I’m  more  hurt  than  profited  thereby.” 

XXVIII. 

THE  OX  A HD  THE  TOAD. 

(P.  F.  84.) 

An  ox  at  water  once  a toadling  crush’d, 

Whose  dam,  then  absent,  quickly  homeward  rush’d, 
And  question’d  all  its  brethren  where  it  was  : 

“ Mother,  ’tis  dead.  Before  its  time,  alas, 


30 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


“ Beneath  the  hoof  of  a huge  quadruped 
“ ’Twas  trampled  down  ! ” “ Was  it  as  large,”  she  said, 
“ As  this  ? ” She  tried  her  proper  size  to  strain. 

“ Mother,”  cried  they,  “ forbear  ! nor  fume  in  vain. 

“ You’ll  rend  yourself  in  sunder,  ere  you  rise, 

“ Howe  er  you  ape  it,  to  that  monster’s  size.” 


XXIX. 

THE  AGED  HORSE . 

(p.  f.  174.) 

Once  an  old  horse  was  sold  to  work  the  mill : 

And  yok’d  each  eve  a grinder’s  task  to  fill. 

At  last  it  groan’d  and  said  : “ What  courses  past, 

“ Round  what  strange  millers’  turns  I wheel  at  last !” 

Be  not  too  much  with  fortune’s  hopes  elate  : 

Age  ends  for  many  in  a troubled  state. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


3l 


XXX. 

THE  SCULPTOR  AND  MERCURY. \ 

(p.  f.  265.) 

A man  had  wrought  a Mercury  for  sale 
In  marble.  Would-be  buyers  did  not  fail. 

One  for  a pillar  (he’d  just  lost  a son) 

To  buy  it  wish’d,  for  a god’s  statue  one. 

Night  came  : yet  it  the  sculptor  had  not  sold. 

So  he  agreed  at  morn  again  t’  unfold 

The  statue,  if  they’d  come.  In  slumber  deep 

He  gazed  on  Hermes  at  the  gates  of  sleep, 

Who  said,  “ Good  measure  of  my  worth  you  take, 
“ Since  god  or  corpse  of  me  you  mean  to  make.” 

XXXI. 

THE  CA  TS  AND  MICE . 

(P.  F.  291.) 

Between  the  cats  and  mice  of  old  there  raged 
A truceless  war  : a feud  no  blood  assuaged. 

The  cats  were  victors.  And  the  vanquished  mice 
Deem’d  this  the  cause,  and  this  their  army’s  vice, 


32 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


A lack  of  leaders  of  distinguisht  front, 

And  discipline,  to  meet  the  battle’s  brunt. 

Then  chose  they  mice  for  rank,  might,  counsel,  famed, 
And,  as  to  prowess,  more  than  all  unblamed. 

Who  marshalling  their  squadrons  soon  devise 
A mimic  phalanx,  troops,  and  companies. 

Now,  all  array’d  and  marshall’ d,  forth  there  stood 
A mouse,  and  challenged  all  the  feline  brood. 

Thin  straws  from  mud  walls  every  chief  had  bound 
Before  his  brows.  Beheld  of  all  around, 

They  took  the  lead,  the  foremost  of  the  host  : 

Alas  ! again  the  mice  the  day  have  lost. 

Safe  to  their  holes  the  undistinguish’d  fled  : 

But  for  each  vainly-ornamented  head 

The  narrow  entrance  proved,  alack,  too  small  : 

Alone  outside  were  ta'en  the  heroes  all. 

Meetly  o’er  them  the  foe  a trophy  set  : 

For  each  mouse-chief  a feline  captor  met. 

Our  fable’s  moral  is,  that  safety  lies 

Less  in  high  rank  than  that  which  most  despise. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


33 


XXXII. 

THE  CAT  AND  VENDS. 

(p.  F.  88.)  J 

A cat,  that  loved  a handsome  man,  was  blest 
By  the  Loves’  mother  granting  her  request : 

To  change  her  shape  permission  Venus  gave 
For  lovely  woman’s  : such  who  would  not  rave 
Unless  he  won  ? ’Twas  now  the  man’s  to  bend 
To  love  and  marriage.  At  the  banquet’s  end 
A mouse  ran  past.  Down  the  deep  couch’s  side 
Intent  upon  its  capture  sprang  the  bride. 

The  nuptials  ceased.  Love  vanish’d  from  among 
His  mocking  sports.  For  nature  was  too  strong. 

XXXIII. 

THE  FARMER  AND  THE  STARLINGS. 

(P.  F.  99.) 

The  Pleiads  set,  ’twas  time  to  cast  the  seed  : 

A farmer  sow’d  his  fallow  : then  took  heed 
To  watch  and  guard  it ; for  a countless  host 
Of  black  and  croaking  daws  had  o’er  it  cross’d, 

D 


34 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


And  starlings,  bent  the  tillage  to  destroy. 

With  empty  sling  there  follow’d  him  a boy. 

Now  with  the  starlings  ’twas  the  usual  thing, 

To  list  the  farmer  calling  for  his  sling  ; 

And  fly  ere  he  discharged  it.  Hence  he  sought 
A new  device,  and  thus  the  stripling  taught 
To  act.  “ My  lad,  since  we  must  needs  outwit 
“ This  clever  race  of  birds,  a plan  I’ve  hit. 

" So  when  they  come,  and  I for  bread  shall  ask, 

“ To  hand  the  sling,  not  bread,  will  be  your  task.” 
The  starlings  came,  and  on  the  tillage  fed ; 

And  he,  as  was  agreed  on,  ask’d  for  bread. 

They  did  not  fly.  The  lad  supplied  the  stones 
And  sling.  The  old  man  aim’d  and  brake  the  bones 
Of  many  a starling  : shoulders,  crowns,  and  shins  : 
Till  from  his  land  the  remnant  flight  begins. 

Some  cranes  that  met  them  ask’d  them  “how  they 
fare  ? ” 

Then  said  a daw  : “ Of  base  mankind  beware  ! 

“ Each  speaks  to  other,  words  unlike  his  deeds.” 

Dread  is  the  race  that  but  by  guile  succeeds. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


35 


XXXIV. 

THE  BOY  EATING  THE  ENTRAILS. 

(P.  F.  348.) 

What  time  with  vineboughs  men  the  broad-floor  strew, 
A bull  to  Ceres  once  the  rustics  slew. 

Tables  of  meat  and  casks  of  wine  were  there  ; 

But  one  poor  lad  had  gorged  too  large  a share 
Of  the  bull’s  entrails.  Swoln  he  homeward  hies, 

And  sore  bewails  his  stomach’s  weight  and  size. 

Once  in  his  mother’s  arms,  “ Alas  ! ” cried  he. 

“ What  is’t  % ” she  said.  “ Oh,  all  is  o’er  with  me  ! 

“ My  wretched  fate  is  present  death,  no  doubt ; 

“ For,  mother,  see,  my  bowels  gushing  out.” 

“ Don’t  try  to  keep  it  down  !”  the  dame  replied  ; 

“ ’Tis  not  your  own,  dear  ! but  the  bull’s,  inside  ! ” 

So  when  an  orphan’s  substance  guardians  spend, 

And  retribution  comes  to  faithless  friend, 

To  such,  deep-groaning  at  disgorging  hour, 

Methinks  this  fable  one  might  quote  with  power. 


d 2 


36 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XXXV. 

THE  MONKEYS. 

(p.  F.  366.) 

Twins  at  each  birth  the  female  monkey  bears, 
Yet  gives  not  them  her  love  in  equal  shares. 
For,  by  her  illstarr’d  fondness  one  opprest 
Is  kill’d  with  kindness  in  her  rugged  breast. 
The  other  as  a useless  idiot  thrown 
Adrift,  an  outcast,  thrives  when  left  alone. 

Men’s  natures  oft  are  such,  that  friendliness 
Iti  them  than  hate  is  to  be  chosen  less. 


XXXVI. 

THE  OAK  AND  THE  REED. 

(p.  F.  179.) 

A mountain-wind  tore  from  its  roots  an  oak, 

A wondrous  old-world  plant,  with  sweeping  stroke ; 
And  lodg’d  it  in  a stream,  where  to  and  fro 
The  eddies  sway’d  it.  Close  beside  there  grow 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


37 


Upon  the  bank,  by  rippling  water  fed, 

Unnumber’d  reeds.  “ ’Twas  strange,”  the  stout  oak 
said, 

“ That  plants  so  frail  and  feeble  did  not  fall, 

“ While  giant  oaks  are  riven  up  roots  and  all.” 

Sagely  the  reed  made  answer  : “ Marvel  not  : 

“ Through  struggling  with  the  blasts,  a fall  you  got : 

“ If  but  our  slender  tops  the  light  breeze  fill, 

“ We  meekly  bend  us  with  a yielding  will.” 

So  spake  the  reed.  Our  fable,  look  you,  shows 
’Tis  best  to  bow  to  might,  and  not  t’  oppose. 


XXXVII. 

THE  HEIFER  AND  THE  BULL. 

(p.  F.  1 13.) 

A heifer  yet  unbroken,  roaming  free, 

A bull  hard-work’d  in  ploughing  chanced  to  see  ; 
And  said,  “ Poor  wretch,  how  grievous  is  thy  toil !” 
Nought  said  the  bull,  but  still  upturn’d  the  soil. 


38 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


Soon,  when  the  rustics  held  their  solemn  feast, 

The  aged  bull  to  pasture  went  released  ; 

But  ropes  that  bound  its  horns  the  heifer  drew, 
That  it  with  blood  the  altar  might  bedew. 

To  whom  this  sentence  then  the  elder  spoke  : 

“ ’Twas  for  this  end  they  kept  thee  from  the  yoke. 
“ Young  before  old,  thou  dost  the  altar  deck  ; 

“ The  axe,  and  not  the  yoke,  will  bruise  thy  neck.” 


XXXVIII. 

THE  PINE . 

(p.  f.  123.) 

Some  woodmen,  bent  a forest  pine  to  split, 

Into  each  fissure  sundry  wedges  fit, 

To  keep  the  void,  and  render  work  more  light. 

Out  groan’d  the  pine,  “ Why  should  I vent  my  spite 
“ Against  the  axe,  which  never  touch’d  my  root, 

“ So  much  as  these  curst  wedges,  mine  own  fruit ; 

“ Which  rend  me  through,  inserted  here  and  there  !” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


39 


A fable  this,  intended  to  declare, 

That  not  so  dreadful  is  a stranger's  blow, 

As  wrongs  which  men  receive  from  those  they  know. 

XXXIX. 

THE  DOLPHINS  AND  THE  CRAB . 

(p.  f.  116.) 

’Twixt  whales  and  dolphins  there  was  difference 
great : 

And  to  them  came  a crab  to  mediate. 

Just  as,  in  states,  if  one  of  small  renown 
Should  act  peacemaker  for  each  rival  crown. 


XLI. 

THE  LIZARD. 

(p.  F.  388.) 

’Tis  said  a lizard  burst  its  back  in  twain 
In  vain  attempts  a dragon’s  size  t’  attain. 
Hurt  to  thyself  will  be  thy  certain  fate, 
If  men  far  higher  thou  shouldst  imitate. 


40 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XLII. 

THE  DOG  AND  THE  COOK. 

(P.  F.  62.) 

High  feast  a-cit  was  holding,  at  the  end 
Of  sacrifice.  His  house-dog  ask’d  a friend, 

Whom  he  had  met,  to  come  and  share  his  meal. 

He  came.  The  cook  upraised  him  by  the  heel 
And  toss’d  him  o’er  the  wall  into  the  street. 

Whom  when  each  dog  did  with  the  question  greet, 

“ What  chee;  1 ” he  said,  “ What  more  could  be 
desired, 

“ When  I scarce  know  by  what  way  I retired  ? ” 


XLIII. 

THE  STAG  AND  THE  HUNTERS. 

(P.  F.  128.) 

An  antler’ d stag,  athirst  in  midday  heat, 
Drank  of  a silent  pool  beneath  his  feet. 

At  these  and  at  his  hoofs  he  felt  disdain, 

As  the  clear  stream  reflected  them  again. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


4i 


Not  thus  his  horns  with  swelling  heart  he  eyed  ; 
But  Nemesis  was  near,  to  chasten  pride. 

For  soon  a train  of  huntsmen  fill’d  the  ground, 
With  ample  nets  and  keenly-scenting  hound. 

He  saw  and  fled,  nor  stay’d  to  quench  his  thirst, 
And  with  fleet  foot  across  the  champain  burst. 

A thickly-tangled  wood  at  last  he  gain’d, 

And  found  his  antlers  in  its  boughs  detain’d. 

“ Mistaken  wretch  ! ” he  cried,  “ with  scorn  to  treat, 
“ In  pride  of  treacherous  horns,  my  saving  feet ; 

“ Had  those  been  true,  these  had  secured  retreat.” 

When  you  on  your  affairs  deliberate, 

Hold  nought  beforehand  in  a certain  state. 

Yet  cast  off  nought  as  hopeless  in  disgust, 

Our  greatest  traitors  oft  are  hopes  we  trust. 


42 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XLIV. 

THE  BULLS  AND  THE  LION.  s 
(P.  F.  394.) 

Three  bulls  together  in  one  pasture  grazed  : 
Of  seizing  these  a lion’s  hopes  were  raised. 

He  thought  their  union  all  his  aims  would  foil, 
So  with  deep-festering  slanders  to  embroil 
The  friends  he  bent  his  mind.  Asunder  they 
Became,  in  turns,  the  lion’s  easy  prey. 

If  thou  wouldst  live  securely  to  the  end; 
Distrust  a foe,  but  hold  thou  fast  a friend. 


XLV. 

THE  GOATHERD  AND  THE  GOATS. 

(P.  F.  12.) 

Twas  snowy  weather  : and  a goatherd  led 
Into  a cave,  he  deem’d  untenanted, 

His  goats,  all-white  with  snow  descending  thick 
But  thither,  as  he  found,  had  come  more  quick 


The  Fables  of  Babnus, 


43 


Some  horned  wild  goats*  a far  larger  stock* 

And  finer,  too,  than  his  accustom’d  flock. 

Green  shoots  to  them  he  soon  began  to  fling  : 

But  to  his  own  let  tedious  famine  cling ; 

Till,  when  the  sky  grew  clear,  he  found  them  dead. 
Meanwhile  the  wild  goats  hurried  off  to  tread 
The  trackless  thickets  of  unpastured  heights. 
Hence  ridicule  upon  the  goatherd  lights, 

Returning  goat-less.  Seeking  prizes  new, 

He  lost  the  profit  of  his  old  one  too. 


XL  VI. 

THE  SICK  STAG, 

(p.  F.  131.) 

A stag,  whose  lissome  joints  grew  stiff,  had  made 
A grassy  couch  outside  a woodland  shade. 

Hence  ample  fodder  to  his  need  he  found. 

Till  soon,  to  see  their  neighbour,  gathered  round 
Whole  tribes  of  beasts ; (a  right  good  neighbour  he  !) 
Each  came,  and  each  with  his  supplies  made  free 


44 


The  Fables  of  Babrins. 


By  thoughtless  nibbling,  ere  it  sought  the  wood. 
Thus  sank,  not  by  disease,  but  want  of  food, 

A stag  that  scarce  had  yet  two  crow-lives  told  : 
Had  he  lack'd  friends,  he  haply  had  died  old  ! 


XLVII. 

THE  OLD  FARMER  AND  HIS  SONS. 

(p.  F.  103.) 

Among  old  worthies  lived  an  ancient  man 
With  many  sons  : and  since  his  life  began 
To  wane  at  last,  that  truth  might  so  be  taught, 

He  bade  that  there  should  be  before  him  brought 
A bundle  of  thin  rods.  ’Twas  soon  at  hand. 

“ Now  use,”  said  he,  “ the  strength  you  each  command, 
“ To  break  the  sticks,  my  sons,  thus  closely  bound.” 

“ Well,”  he  rejoined,  when  force  in  vain  was  found, 

“ Then  take  them  one  by  one.”  Each  broke  with  ease. 
“ E’en  thus,”  he  cried,  “ my  children,  if  ye  please 
“ To  live  in  union,  none  have  power  to  mar 
“ Your  bond  of  strength,  e’en  though  superior  far. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


45 


“ But  if  ’twixt  brothers’  hearts  exists  a breach, 
“ The  single  rod  pourtrays  the  fate  of  each.” 

Love  between  brothers  is  man’s  best  of  gifts, 
And  oft  the  humble  to  high  fortune  lifts. 


XLIX. 

THE  WORKMAN  AND* FOR  TUNE. 

((p.  f.  316.) 

Close  to  a well  a workman  slept  one  night, 
Unwittingly.  But  Fortune  met  his  sight. 

He  seem’d  to  hear ; “ What  ho,  there,  sirrah,  wake  ! 
“ Lest  of  thy  tumble  I the  blame  should  take 
“ Among  mankind,  and  earn  an  uglier  name  : 

“ For  each  man’s  trips  and  haps  I bear  the  blame, 

“ Howe’er  his  own  the  fault,  ’tis  just  the  same.” 


4 6 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


L, 

THE  FOX  AND  THE  WOODCUTTER. 

(p-  f.  35-) 

Hard  on  a fox  a hunter  in  full  chase 

Was  pressing.  Reynard,  needing  breathing-space, 

Spying  a woodman,  cried,  “ By  those  who  save, 

“ ’Neath  yonder  just-fell’d  poplars  let  me  crave 
“ A shelter.  To  the  field  betray  me  not.” 

The  woodman  sware.  The  fox  a shelter  got. 

The  hunter  came,  and  of  the  man  would  know, 

“ Did  the  fox  enter  there,  or  onward  go  i” 

Said  he,  “ I saw  not but  his  finger  showed 
Meanwhile  to  reynard’s  hiding-place  the  road. 

In  haste  at  once  the  hunter  passing  on 
Believed  the  words.  Her  hottest  danger  gone, 
Our  fox  began  from  out  the  poplar-heap 
With  fawning  tail,  but  spiteful  grin,  to  peep. 

The  old  man  said,  “ You  owe  your  life  to  me. 

“ ’Twas  I from  risk  of  capture  set  you  free ; 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


47 


“ Be  grateful  therefore.”  “ To  be  sure,”  she  cried, 
“ For  the  vast  help,  I saw  your  acts  supplied. 

“ Farewell ! The  Oath-god  will  exact  his  due. 

“ If  your  voice  saved  me,  yet  your  finger  slew.” 

Let  none  (Heaven's  purpose  errs  not)  think  to  flee 
The  sure  deserts  of  secret  perjury. 


LI. 

THE  WIDOW  AND  THE  SHEEP. 

(p.  f.  382.) 

A widow  kept  at  home  a single  sheep  : 

Out  of  whose  fleece  a larger  gain  to  reap 
She  clipp’d  it  rudely,  press’d  the  shears  too  near 
Its  flesh,  and  kept  them  not  from  wounding  clear. 
The  smarting  sheep  cried  : “ Do  not  torture  me, 

“ My  blood  in  weight  will  small  addition  be. 

“ Nay,  mistress,  nay  ! My  flesh  if  you  require, 
“To  kill  me  quick,  a practis’d  butcher  hire. 

“ But  if  ’tis  fleece  and  wool,  not  flesh,  you  need, 

“ Shearers  will  shear  me,  yet  not  make  me  bleed.” 


48 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


LII. 

THE  DRIVER  AND  THE  WAGGON 
(p.  F.  79.) 

Strong  bulls  to  town  upon  their  shoulders  drew 
A four-wheel’d  wain.  Its  creakings  were  not  few. 
Then  was  the  driver  wroth  ; and  drawing  near, 

He  spoke  so  plain,  it  could  not  choose  but  hear. 

“ Thou  worst  of  goods,  will  not  thy  groaning  cease, 

“ Though  they  whose  shoulders  draw  thee,  hold  their 
peace  ? ” 

It  is  a base  man’s  way,  to  raise  a moan, 

As  if  the  toil  of  others  were  his  own ! 


LIII. 

THE  WOLF  AND  THE  FOX. 


(P.  F.  271.) 


A hapless  fox  fell  in  a wild  wolfs  way, 

And  pray’d  him  her  old  life  to  spare,  not  slay. 

“ I will,  by  Pan,  I will ; ” the  wolf  replied, 

“ If  in  thy  next  three  words  thou  hast  not  lied.’7 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


49 


“ Well : first  then,”  said  she,  “ would  we  had  not 
met ! 

“Next,  that  a blind  wolf  had  my  path  beset ! 

“ And,  third  and  last,”  she  added,  “ go  for  ever  ! 

“ I trust  from  this  day  forth  to  meet  thee  never  ! ” 


LV, 

THE  OX  AND  THE  ASS. 

(P.  F.  IO4.) 

With  a she-ass,  best  shift  his  means  allow’d, 

A tiller  yoked  his  only  ox,  and  plough’d. 

When  these  he  was  preparing  to  unyoke, 

Their  work  being  over,  thus  the  ass  bespoke 
The  ox  : “ Who  carries  home  the  old  man’s  gear  ? ” 
“ The  beast  whose  wont  it  is,”  said  he,  “ ’tis  clear.” 


E 


5o 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


LVI. 

JUPITER  AND  THE  MONKEY. 

A baby-show  with  prizes  Jove  decreed 

For  all  the  beasts,  and  gave  the  choice  due  heed. 

A monkey-mother  came  among  the  rest ; 

A naked,  snub-nosed  pug  upon  her  breast 
She  bore,  in  mother’s  fashion.  At  the  sight 
Assembled  gods  were  moved  to  laugh  outright. 
Said  she,  “ Jove  knoweth  where  his  prize  will  fall 
“ I know,  my  child’s  the  beauty  of  them  all.” 

This  Fable  will  a general  law  attest, 

That  each  one  deems  that  what’s  his  own,  is  best. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


5* 


LVII. 

MERCURY'S  WAGON  AND  THE  ARABS . 

(P.  F.  141.) 

Hermes  had  laden  once  a cart  with  lies, 

And  much  deceit,  and  divers  villanies. 

This  he  essay'd  to  drive  from  race  to  race, 
Passing  near  every  nation’s  dwelling-place, 

And  giving  each  a share.  He  came  at  last 
To  the  Arabian  land.  As  this  he  passed, 

Down  brake  his  wagon  suddenly,  'tis  said, 

And  stuck.  The  Arabs,  eager  for  a raid, 

And  hoping  here  a merchant’s  precious  load, 
Rifled  the  wain,  nor  sent  it  on  its  road 
To  other  tribes  beyond  them.  Hence  I find 
That  false  and  knavish  is  each  Arab’s  mind. 
And,  as  experience  proves,  to  Arab  tongue 
No  particle  of  truth  hath  ever  hung. 


e 2 


52 


The  Fables  of  Babnus . 


LVIIL 

JOVE'S  CASK. 

Jove  in  a cask  all  blessings  pack’d  and  hid, 

A charge  for  man  : but  first  secured  the  lid. 
Unbridled  man,  ago g to  scan  the  gift 
And  its  contents,  essay’d  the  top  to  lift. 

Releas’d,  each  blessing  mounted  to  the  sky 
And  would  not  bide  below,  when  free  to  fly. 

Hope  only  tarried.  Her  the  lid  secured, 

When  closed  at  last.  And  thus  hath  Hope  endured 
In  human  homes.  In  her  sole  form  we  see 
Earnest  of  all  the  goods,  that  then  did  flee. 


LIX. 

JUPITER,  NEPTUNE,  MINERVA,  AND  MOMUS. 
(p-  f-  15  50 

Pallas,  ’tis  said,  with  Neptune  and  with  Jove, 
Which  should  create  a thing  most  perfect,  strove. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


53 


Jove  makes  the  choicest  of  created  things, 

A man.  A dwelling  to  him  Pallas  brings  : 

Neptune  a bull.  They  gave  the  umpire’s  post 
To  Momus  : Heaven  as  yet  he  had  not  lost. 

And  he,  as  was  his  nature,  hating  all, 

At  blaming  the  bull’s  horns  to  work  must  fall, 
Because  they  were  not  set  beneath  his  eyes, 

For  then  he’d  see  to  strike.  Man  lost  the  prize, 
Because  not  open  was  his  breast,  but  closed, 

Else  each  would  see  his  neighbour’s  plans  exposed  : 
He  blamed  the  house,  because  no  wheels  were  made 
Of  iron  at  its  base ; that  it,  convey’d 
To  other  climes  might  pass  with  roving  lord. 

What  purports  then  to  us  the  Fable’s  word  ? 

Prefer  not  thou  to  carp  : but  strive  to  do. 

Momus  will  nought  in  pleasant  aspect  view. 


54 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


LX. 

THE  MOUSE  THAT  FELL  LNTO  THE  POT 

A mouse  into  a lid-less  broth-pot  fell  : 

Choked  with  the  grease,  and  bidding  life  farewell, 
He  said  : “ My  fill  of  meat  and  drink  have  I, 

“ And  all  good  things  : ’tis  time  that  I should  die  ” 

Thou  art  that  dainty  mouse  among  mankind. 

If  hurtful  sweets  are  not  by  thee  declined. 


LXI. 

THE  HUNTER  AND  THE  FLSHERMAN. 

(P.  F.  220.) 

A huntsman  going  laden  from  the  hill, 

A fisher  too,  whose  fish  his  basket  fill, 

As  luck  would  have  it,  chanced  one  day  to  meet, 
And  lo  ! the  hunter  thought  the  fish  a treat ; 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


55 


The  fisherman  preferr’d  the  hunter’s  game. 

So  they  exchanged  their  spoil.  They  did  the  same, 
Each  for  a time,  to  suit  the  other’s  taste, 

With  all  they  took  : till  some  one  said,  “ You’ll  waste 
“ And  mar  by  use  the  present  charm  of  these  : 

“ And  each  again  will  seek  what  used  to  please.” 


LXII. 

THE  MULE . 

(P.  F.  157.) 

A mule,  in  lazy  manger  fed  on  hay, 

And  fresh  with  corn,  began  to  leap  and  say, 
Kicking  his  heels,  “ A racer  is  my  dam, 

“ And  I for  her  a match  in  fleetness  am.” 

Yet  with  sad  visage  soon  his  course  he  check’d. 
Constrain’d  his  sire,  the  ass,  to  recollect. 


56 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


LXIII. 

THE  HERO  ( OR  DAEMON). 

(p.  f.  161.) 

A good  man  for  a hero’s  fane  assign’d 

Space  in  his  court -yard.  Here  he  loved  to  bind 

Wreaths  on  the  altars,  rich  libations  pay, 

And,  sacrificing  oft,  devoutly  pray. 

“ Loved  hero,  hail ! thy  fellow-lodger  bless 
“ With  plenteous  gifts.”  At  midnight  his  address 
Met  answer.  “ Heroes  can  vouchsafe  no  good 
“To  man ; for  these  ’twere  meet  the  Gods  were  sued 
“ ’Tis  rather  all  the  ills  that  fall  to  men, 

“ That  we  dispense  : when  seeking  evil  then, 

“ Pray  us  ! Ask  one , and  many  I’ll  bestow. 

“ So  now  to  whom  to  sacrifice  you  know  ! ” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


57 


LXIV. 

THE  FIR-TREE  AND  THE  BRAMBLE. 

(p.  f.  T25.) 

A fir-tree  and  a bramble  disagreed, 

For  the  fir  alway  paid  to  self  the  meed 
Of  praise.  “ I’m  fine,  well-grown  in  point  of  size  : 
“ And  my  straight  top  is  neighbour  to  the  skies. 

“ ’Tis  I,  am  roof  of  mansions,  keel  of  ships  : 

“So  much  my  comeliness  all  trees  outstrips.” 

To  whom  the  bramble  said,  “Keep  well  in  view 
“ The  axe,  whose  business  is  thy  trunk  to  hew, 

“ And  saws,  that  cut  thee : haply  thou’lt  prefer 
“To  be  the  bramble,  rather  than  the  fir.” 

All  men  of  mark  more  rank  and  credit  gain 
Than  meaner  folks,  but  still  more  risks  sustain. 


5» 


7 he  Fables  of  Babrius. 


LXV. 

THE  CRANE  AND* THE  PEACOCK. 

(p.  f.  3970 

To  a bright-plumaged  peacock,  smart  and  vain, 

This  sharp  retort  fell  from  an  ashen  crane. 

“ Through  these  dull  wings,  whose  colour  you  decry, 

“ I scream  aloft,  in  starry  heights  I fly. 

“ You,  cock-like,  flap  your  wings.  The  tail  you  spread, 
“ With  all  its  gold,  is  never  seen  o’erhead.” 

Rather  would  I in  threadbare  coat  aspire, 

Than  live  inglorious,  tho’  in  rich  attire. 

LXVI. 

THE  MAN  WITH  TWO  WALLETS. 

(*•  f.  359*) 

Prometheus  was  a god,  an  elder  god  : 

Man,  the  brutes’  lord,  he  fashion’d  of  the  sod, 

’Tis  said,  and  round  his  neck  two  wallets  hung, 

Full  of  all  ills,  that  rise  mankind  among  : 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


59 


One,  holding  others’  faults,  in  front  was  thrown  : 

The  larger,  slung  behind  him,  held  his  own. 

» 

Hence  others’  falls,  methinks,  men  clearly  see  : 

But  when  one  should  look  homeward,  blind  are  we. 

LXVII. 

THE  WILD  ASS  AND  THE  LION. 

(p.  F.  258.) 

Chase-partners  were  the  lion  and  wild  ass  : 

That  did  in  prowess,  this  in  speed  surpass  : 

A booty  of  fat  beasts  their  hunt  supplied, 

Which  into  three  the  lion  would  divide. 

“ This  first,”  said  he,  “ as  foremost,  I shall  take 
“ In  right  of  kinghood.  That  my  equal  stake 
“ Marks  as  my  part.  And,  for  the  hindmost  lot, 

“ ’Twill  cause  you  hurt,  unless  you  flee,  I wot.” 

• 

Measure  your  strength,  nor,  with  a man  more  strong, 
To  company,  or  partnership  belong. 


6o 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


« 


LXVIII. 

APOLLO  AND  JUPITER. 

(p.  f.  15 1.) 

Said  the  far-darter  to  the  gods  on  high, 

“ Not  one  can  farther  shoot  or  throw  than  I.” 

In  sport  great  Jove  Apollo’s  challenge  took, 

And  quick  the  lots  in  Mars’  cap  Hermes  shook. 

Luck  was  with  Phoebus.  Soon  the  golden  bow 
And  string  he  circles ; lets  the  arrow  go, 

And  shoots  within  the  gardens  of  the  West. 

Said  Jove,  when  the  same  range  his  feet  had  prest, 

“ Space  fails  me,  boy.  To  what  point  can  I shoot  % ” 
Thus  without  shaft  he  won  the  arrow’s  fruit. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


6 1 


LXIX. 

7 HE  HARE  AND  THE  HOUND. 

A dog,  no  novice  in  the  chase,  pursued 
A rough-pawed  hare,  disturb’d  from  tangled  wood. 
And  soon  was  left  behind.  A goatherd  near, 
“Fine  runners  beat  you  !”  said,  the  hound  to  jeer. 
Said  he,  “ One  needs  must  use  far  more  despatch 
“To  save  one’s  own,  than  other  lives  to  snatch.” 


LXX. 

THE  MARRIAGES  OF  THE  GODS. 

(P.  F.  162.) 

The  Gods  were  wedding.  Each  had  found  a mate. 
To  War  it  chanced  till  last  of  all  to  wait 
And  so  with  Insolence,  left  all  alone, 

In  love  he  fell,  and  won  her  for  his  own. 

So  runs  the  Fable.  Hence,  devoted  swain, 
Where’er  she  goes,  he  follows  in  her  train. 


62 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


Oh  then  may  Insolence,  most  apt  to  smile 
On  commons,  and  to  lead  them  wrong  the  while, 

Be  ever  from  our  states  and  nations  far, 

For  close  behind  her  comes  her  husband,  War. 

LXXI. 

THE  HUSBANDMAN  AND  THE  SEA. 

(r.  F.  94.) 

A countryman  beheld  a crowded  ship 
Its  prow  beneath  the  arching  surges  dip ; 

“ Would  thou  hadst  ne’er  been  ploughed,”  he  cried, 
“ thou  main ! 

“ Harsh  element,  of  which  all  men  complain.” 

The  sea  o’erheard,  assumed  a woman’s  tone, 

And  said,  “ I pray  you,  leave  my  name  alone. 

“For  ’tis  not  I that  cause  you  all  these  woes  : 

“ But  every  blast  that  round  about  me  blows, 

“ See  me  and  sail  me,  yonder  winds  removed, 

“ And  gentler  than  your  earth  you’ll  own  me  proved.” 

Bad  natures  oft  turn  many  goods  to  worse, 

Thus  e’en  a blessing  comes  to  seem  a curse. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


63 


LXXII. 

THE  BIRDS  AND  THE  JACKDAW. 

(P.  F.  200.) 

A contest  in  Heaven’s  courts  for  beauty’s  prize, 
Bright  Iris,  who  with  the  Gods’  tidings  hies, 
Proclaim’d  to  birds.  The  news  soon  spread  to  all, 
And  to  himself  each  hoped  the  meed  would  fall. 
Rose  from  a rock,  that  rarely  goat  had  scaled, 

A spring,  whose  clear  wave  ne’er  in  summer  fail’d. 
To  it  resorted  all  the  feather’d  race, 

Intent  on  washing,  each,  its  wings  and  face, 
Shaking  its  wings,  its  plumage  combing  clean ; 
When,  lo  ! a jackdaw  to  approach  was  seen, 

A crow’s  now-ancient  son.  From  ev’ry  plume 
And  each  wet  shoulder  he  made  haste  to  assume 
A stolen  feather.  Soon  his  various  guise 
In  the  Gods’  sight  the  eagle’s  form  outvies. 

Him  Jove,  astonished,  victor  had  declared, 

Had  not  the  swallow,  Pallas-like,  unbared 


6 4 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


The  cheating  rogue,  her  feathers  quick  to  claim ; 

“ Pray,”  said  the  daw,  “ expose  me  not  to  shame.” 
To  pluck  him,  next,  the  thrush  and  turtle-dove, 
Tomb-haunting  lark,  and  jay,  together  strove ; 

The  hawk,  a-watch  for  birds  not  yet  full  grown, 
Nay,  all  the  birds.  Thus  was  the  jackdaw  known. 

My  son,  array  thee  in  thy  proper  dress  : 

For  borrow’d  clothes  will  leave  thee  garmentless. 


LXXIII. 

THE  KITE. 

(p.  F.  170.) 

Of  old  far  other  was  the  kite’s  shrill  cry ! * 

Till  once  she  heard  a horse  neigh  tunefully. 

She  needs  must  ape  the  steed ; and  then  nor  heard 
Her  former  voice,  nor  that  which  she  preferred. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


^5 


LXXIV. 

THE  MAN,  THE  HORSE,  THE  OX,  AND  THE  DOG. 
(p.  f.  173.) 

A horse,  an  ox,  a dog,  distrest  by  cold, 

To  seek  the  warmth  of  a man’s  house  made  bold. 

He  let  them  enter  by  his  open’d  door, 

And  was  not  slack  to  give  them  of  his  store, 
Warming  his  guests  withal  beside  his  hearth  : 

The  horse  found  corn,  of  vetch  the  ox  no  dearth, 
While  the  dog  shared  the  table  of  his  host. 

Then  fain  would  they  requite  their  supper’s  cost ; 
And  so  its  life’s  chief  habit  each  bestows. 

The  horse  gave  first.  Hence  each  among  us  glows 
With  leaping  spirit  in  our  early  prime. 

The  ox  came  next.  Therefore,  at  mid-life’s  time, 
Man  toils,  and  dearly  loves  to  hoard  and  save. 

The  dog,  ’tis  said,  life’s  latest  features  gave. 

Whence,  Branchus,  each,  as  age  steals  o’er  him,  grows 
Peevish  apace,  caressing  only  those 
To  whom  he  looks  for  food.  A stranger’s  face 
Provokes  his  bark,  and  never  wins  his  grace. 


F 


66 


The  Fables  of  JBabrius, 


LXXV. 

THE  UNSKILFUL  PHYSICIAN 
(P.  F.  169.) 

There  lived  a quack.  And  all  but  he  could  tell 
A sick  man  not  to  fear ; he’d  soon  be  well  : 

“ Diseases  run  their  time,  but  then  are  over ; ” 

The  doctor  came  and  said,  “ You  won’t  recover  ! 

“ Make  all  your  preparations.  You  must  die  ! 

“ I scorn  to  cheat : I’m  not  the  man  to  lie. 

“To  morrow  at  the  most  you’ll  scarce  get  o’er !” 

He  said,  nor  visited  his  patient  more. 

But,  lo  ! the  man  from  his  disorder  rose, 

Pallid,  and  somewhat  shaky  on  his  toes. 

Taking  his  walk,  the  doctor  met  him  so  : 

“ Good  morrow  ! How  goes  on  the  world  below  ? ” 
“ Oh  ! deadly  lively ! Lethe’s  draught  is  flat ! 

“ But  if  you’d  know  what  hell’s  high  powers  were  at, 
“ Doctors  just  now  incurr’d  their  fiercest  threats, 

“ Because  each  sick  man  well  so  quickly  gets. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


67 


t 


“ They  were  proscribing  all.  Among  the  first 
“ They  talk’d  of  posting  you.  But  forth  I burst 
“ A little  timid  from  the  shadowy  crowd, 

“ And  suppliant  before  their  sceptres  bow’d  ; 

“ And  sware  to  them  the  truth  I could  not  hide, 
“ You  were  no  doctor,  but  had  been  belied.” 


LXXVI. 

THE  KNIGHT  AND  HIS  CHARGER. 

(p.  F.  178.) 

A knight  his  charger  pamper’d  day  by  day, 

So  long  as  war  was  rife,  with  corn  and  hay, 

As  his  brave  comrade  in  the  battle’s  din ; 

But  when  war  ceas’d,  and  peace  at  last  came  in, 
When  from  his  deme  the  knight  drew  pay  no  more, 
Oft  from  the  woods  to  town  his  charger  bore 
Huge  logs  of  timber,  and  with  various  load 
Toil’d  as  a hireling  on  a weary  road ; 


f 2 


68 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


On  sorry  chaff  he  barely  life  preserv’d, 

And  yoked  for  draught,  no  longer  knighthood  serv’d. 
But  war  again  was  heard  without  the  walls, 

On  each  to  burnish  arms  the  trumpet  calls, 

To  whet  his  steel,  his  war-horse  to  array : 

Again  our  knight  has  bridled  for  the  fray 
His  charger,  led  for  him  to  take  the  field, 

But  its  weak  limbs  began  to  sink  and  yield. 

“ Go  rank  thyself  with  infantry,”  it  said  : 

i 

“ If  thou  could’st  me  from  horse  to  ass  degrade,  r~ 
“ No  more  can  I my  former  self  be  made.”  J 


LXXVII. 

THE  FOX  AND  THE  CROW. 

(P.  F.  204.) 

A crow  upon  his  perch  was  munching  cheese, 

When  a sly  fox  by  arguments  like  these, 

To  suit  herself,  beguiled  him  of  his  prize  : — 

“Fair  are  thy  plumes,  good  crow,  and  bright  thine 
eyes, 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


6 9 


“ Charming  thy  neck,  an  eagle's  breast  thou  hast, 

“ In  talons  thou  art  by  no  brute  surpass’d. 

“'Tis  strange  that  dumb  should  be  a bird  so  smart !” 
The  flatter'd  crow  became  elate  in  heart, 

And,  cawing,  from  his  mouth  the  cheese  let  fall ; 

This  reynard  snatch’d,  and  tauntingly  did  call, 

“ ’Tis  true  thou  wast  not  dumb,  for  thou  canst  speak, 
“ Yet,  spite  of  all  thou  hast,  thy  mind  is  weak.” 


LXXVIII. 

THE  SICK  CROW. 

(P.  F.  208.) 

A sick  crow  to  its  weeping  mother  said, 

“ Weep  not,  but  pray  the  Gods  that  from  the  bed 
“ Of  sad  disease  and  suffering  I may  rise.” 

“ Will  any  god,”  said  she,  “ child,  hear  my  cries, 

“ And  save  thee  ? Is  there  one  of  whom  'tis  true, 
“ His  altar  never  has  been  robb'd  by  you  *?  ” 


7o 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


LXXIX. 

THE  DOG  AND  THE  SHADOW. 

(p.  F.  233.) 

Tray  from  the  shambles  stole  a piece  of  meat ; 
And,  as  he  cross’d  a stream,  upon  its  sheet 
Of  crystal  saw  the  shadow  magnified ; 

Which,  letting  go  the  flesh,  to  grasp  he  tried. 

He  gain’d  nor  it,  nor  that  which  he  had  lost, 
And,  supperless,  again  the  river  cross’d. 

All  avaricious  men  consume  in  vain 
Uncertain  lives,  in  fleeting  hope  of  gain. 


LXXX. 

THE  CAMEL. 

(P.  F.  l8l.) 

A drinking  master  would  his  camel  bring 
To  dance  to  flutes,  and  brazen  cymbal’s  ring. 

“ Would  that  I could  on  a plain  road  advance, 

“ Causing  no  laughter,”  said  she,  “ much  less  dance. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


7i 


LXXXI. 

THE  FOX  AND  THE  MONKEY. 

(P.  F.  43.) 

A fox  said  to  an  ape,  “ The  stone  you  see 
“ Records  my  sire’s  and  grandsire’s  memory.” 
Said  Pug  to  Reynard,  “ Lie,  as  likes  you  best, 
“ For  none  remain  your  story’s  truth  to  test.” 

It  marks  a bad  man  not  to  shrink  from  lies, 
When,  lying,  he  can  shun  detective  eyes. 


LXXXII. 

THE  LION  AND  THE  FOX. 

(P.  F.  257.) 

A mouse  ran  o’er  a sleeping  lion’s  mane, 

And  the  roused  brute  his  wrath  could  not  restrain  : 
So  bristling  up,  he  leapt  from  out  his  lair. 

A neighbour-fox  derision  did  not  spare, 


72 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


That  on  a mouse  the  king  of  brutes  should  spend 
His  ire.  Said  he,  “ I fear  not,  cunning  friend, 

“ Lest  mice  my  skin  should  nettle,  and  escape  : 

“ But  roads  o’er  me  take  an  ill-habit’s  shape.” 

The  boldness  of  the  impudent  repress, 

Small  though  it  be,  before  it  can  progress  ! 

Nor  let  it  by  the  mean  be  lightly  dreamt, 

That  thou  wilt  be  a butt  for  their  contempt. 

V LXXXIII. 

THE  HORSE  AND  THE  GROOM, 

(p.  F.  176.) 

A groom  each  day  his  horse  kept  currying, 

Yet  each  day  too  the  corn-bin  emptying. 

Then  said  the  horse,  “ If  sleek  you  really  would 
“ Behold  me,  prythee,  do  not  sell  my  food.” 

True  love  will  study  things  expedient 

And  useful.  Vain,  indeed,  is  ornament 

As  a makeweight,  when  needful  things  are  spent. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


73 


LXXXIV. 

THE  GNAT  AND  THE  BULL. 

*(p.  f*  235.) 

A gnat  on  a bull's  horn  his  seat  had  made, 

And,  pausing  first,  thus  with  a buzz  he  said  : 

“ If  I bear  down  or  bend  your  neck  a whit, 

“ I'll  go  and  on  yon  river-poplar  sit.” 

The  bull  cried,  “ Stay  or  go,  for  aught  I care, 

“ I did  not  even  know  when  you  came  there.” 

Absurd  is  he,  who,  being  nought,  will  try 
To  cope  with  great  men,  and  ape  something  high. 

LXXXV. 

THE  DOGS  AND  THE  WOLVES. 

(P.  F.  2 67.) 

A feud  between  the  dogs  and  wolves  arose, 

And  of  their  host  the  dogs  as  leader  chose 
One  from  Achaia  : who,  like  general  sage, 

Kept  holding  back.  His  troops  began  to  rage 


74 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


At  his  preferring  ambush  to  fair  fight. 

“ Why  I delay,”  he  answered*  “ hear  aright, 

“ And  why  I’m  careful.  Prudence  can’t  be  wrong. 
“ Our  foes  I see  are  one  united  throng ; 

“ But  some  of  us  have  from  Molossia  come, 

“ Others  from  Crete,  from  Acarnania  some : 

“ Some  are  Dolopian  : others  Cyprus  boast, 

“ Or  Thrace  their  home  : in  short,  a various  host. 

“ We  differ,  unlike  these,  in  colour  too, 

“ Being,  some  black,  and  some  of  ashen  hue  : 

“ While  some  are  bright  and  mottled  in  the  chest, 
“ Others  are  white.  Discordant  bands  at  best 
“ How  can  I marshal,  with  an  eye  to  war, 

“ Gainst  troops  that  all  alike  in  all  things  are  1 ” 

For  aught  more  good  than  harmony  to  seek 
Is  vain.  Disunion  slavish  is,  and  weak. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


75 


LXXXVI. 

THE  SWOLLEN  EOX. 

(p.  F.  31.) 

An  aged  oak  was  at  its  roots  decay’d, 

Wherein  the  wallet  of  a hind  was  laid, 

Ragged  and  brimful  of  stale  bread  and  meat  3 
A fox  ran  in,  and  its  contents  did  eat. 

Her  stomach  thence,  no  marvel,  wax’d  so  stout, 
That  through  the  opening  she  could  not  get  out. 
She  wept.  Another  fox,  that  came  that  way, 
Said  jeeringly,  “Till  you  are  fasting,  stay  ! 

“ You  won’t  find  egress,  till  you  grow  as  thin 
“ In  stomach,  as  you  were  when  you  got  in.” 


76 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


LXXXVII. 

THE  DOG  AND  THE  HARE. 

(P.  F.  229.) 

Chasing  a mountain  hare,  a certain  hound 
Would  one  while  bite  her,  if  a chance  he  found, 

And  one  while  turn  and  lick  her  as  a friend ; 

Said  puss  at  last,  “ Let  double-dealing  end. 

“ Be  a true  brute.  If  friend,  why  do  you  bite  ? 

“ But  if  a foe,  why  fawn,  nor  be  downright  ] ” 

Of  an  uncertain  class  of  minds  are  those, 

Whom,  if  to  trust  or  distrust,  no  one  knows. 

LXXXVIII. 

THE  LARK  AND  ITS  YOUNG. 

In  the  green  corn  a lark,  that  nurs’d  his  young, 

At  dawn,  in  answer  to  the  lapwing  sung. 

And  now  his  brood  had  fed  on  corn  so  long, 

That  they  had  crests,  and  on  their  wings  were  strong. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


77 


So  the  field’s  owner,  when  he  came  to  see 

The  harvest  ripe,  said,  “ Now  ’tis  time  for  me 

“ Tp  gather  all  my  friends,  that  I may  reap.” 

But  one  of  the  young  crestlings  chanc’d  to  keep 

Watch  on  his  words,  and  ran,  his  sire  to  tell, 

That  to  remove  them  elsewhere  it  were  well. 

But  he  replied,  “’Tis  not  yet  time  to  flee ! 

“ Who  trusts  to  friends,  not  over-fast  is  he.” 

When  the  man  came,  and  saw  the  sun’s  bright  ray 

Had  caused  the  ear  o’er-ripe  to  fall  away, 

And  said,  he’d  hire  reapers  the  next  morn, 

And  pay  all  hands  to  bind  and  sheave  the  com, 

Then  the  lark  to  his  novice  children  cries,  T 

I 

“ ’Tis  time,  my  sons,  that  each  one  elsewhere  flies,  > 
“ Since  on  himself,  not  friends,  the  man  relies.”  J 


78 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


LXXXIX. 

THE  WOLF  AND  THE  LAMB . 

(p.  f.  274.) 

A wolf  beheld  a lambkin  once  astray, 

And  did  not  give  brute  force  at  once  its  way, 

But,  bent  to  seize  it,  found  this  specious  plea : 

“ Small  though  you  were  last  year,  you  slander’d  me.” 
“Nay  ! how  last  year]  A year  I’ve  not  been  born.” 
“Well,  then,  you  nibbled  my  own  field  of  corn  !” 

“ I eat  nor  grass  nor  corn  ! A nursling  still ! ” 

“ Have  you  not  drunk  then  of  my  private  rill  ] ” 

“ As  yet,  my  mother’s  milk’s  my  beverage.” 

Upsprang  the  wolf,  and  ate  the  lamb  in  rage. 

“ A wolf,”  said  he,  “ can’t  for  his  supper  wait, 

“ Though  all  his  pleas  you  may  invalidate.” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


79 


XC. 

THE  LION  AND  THE  FA  WN. 

A lion  raved.  A fawn  from  woods  hard  by 
Saw,  and  began,  “ Ah  ! wretched  we  ! ” to  cry. 

“ How  must  we,  when  he’s  mad,  expect  to  fare, 

“ Whom,  in  his  sane  state,  none  of  us  could  bear?” 


XCI. 

THE  BULL  AND  THE  GOAT. 

(p.  F.  396.) 

Once,  in  a cave  the  goatherds  had  forsaken, 

A bull  had  from  a lion  refuge  taken, 

But  to  contest  his  entrance  there  remain’d 
One  goat  within,  who  horned  war  maintain’d. 

“ Pshaw ! ” said  the  bull,  “ could  I yon  beast  elude, 
“ I’d  bear  a little  space  to  see  you  rude  ! 

“ Just  let  the  lion  pass,  and  you  shall  note 
“ How  wide  the  difference  ’twixt  bull  and  goat.” 


8o 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


XCII. 

THE  TIMID  HUNTER. 

(p.  F.  1 14.) 

A lion-hunter  once,  who  courage  lack’d, 

In  the  hill-forests  dense  his  game  had  track’d. 

A woodman  near  a tall  fir  met  his  view, 

Whom  by  the  Nymphs  he  pray’d,  if  aught  he  knew, 
To  point  the  wild  beast’s  steps,  that  harbour’d  near. 
The  other  said,  “ Good  luck  has  brought  you  here  ! 

“ The  lion’s  self  to  you  I’ll  quickly  show.” 

Pale,  and  with  chattering  teeth,  he  cried,  “No,  no  !” 
“ Pray  don’t  oblige  me,  friend,  beyond  your  task  : 
“To  see  the  lion’s  track,  not  him,  I ask.” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


81 


XCIII. 

THE  WOLVES  AND  THE  SHEEP . 

(p.  F.  268.) 

The  wolf-tribe  sent  the  flock  an  embassy, 

And  proffer’d  oaths  of  peace  and  amity. 

The  terms  were  that  the  dogs  should  be  disgraced, 
Who  caused  the  feud  now  sought  to  be  effaced. 

The  sheep,  weak,  silly  creatures,  were  disposed 
To  scout  old  friends.  An  old  ram  interposed, 

And  said,  his  thick  wool  bristling  from  below, 

“ A novel  mediation  this,  I trow  ! ” 

“ How,  if  unguarded,  am  I safe  with  you, 

“ When  even  now  my  perils  are  not  few, 

“ Though,  while  I feed,  I keep  my  watch-dog  true  , 


G 


82 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XCIV. 

THE  WOLF  AND  THE  HERON 
(P.  F.  276.) 

A bone  in  the  wolfs  throat  was  firmly  set : 

Then  covenanted  he  the  hern  should  get 
A due  reward,  if,  letting  down  his  neck, 

He’d  draw  the  bone,  and  thus  his  suffering  check. 
The  hern  extracted  it,  and  claim’d  his  prize. 

“ Nay,”  said  the  wolf,  with  grinning  teeth  and  eyes, 

“ A meed  of  healing  great  enough  you’ve  found, 

“ Your  head  from  out  the  wolfs  jaw  safe  and  sound.” 

It  is  ill  wages,  when  the  bad  you  aid. 

To  take  no  hurt,  is  to  be  well-repaid. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


83 


xcv. 

THE  SICK  LION . 

(p.  f.  243.) 

Sick  in  a rocky  cleft  a lion  lay, 

Glad  on  the  ground  his  failing  limbs  to  stay. 

With  him  a fox  was  chiefly  intimate, 

To  whom  he  said,  “ Wouldst  have  me  ’scape  my  fate  ? 
“ Then  know,  I hunger  for  the  stag  that  dwells 
“ ’Neath  yon  wild  pine  amid  the  woodland  dells. 

“ And  I,  you  wot,  can  hunt  the  stag  no  more  ; 

“ But  if  you  choose  your  honied  words  to  pour 
“ Into  his  ears  and  trap  him,  mine’s  the  prize !” 

Away  went  Reynard  : where  the  wild  wood  lies 
She  found  him  leaping  o’er  the  mossy  grass, 

And,  first  embracing,  then  began  to  pass 
High  compliments,  and  say  she  came  to  bring 
Good  news.  “ My  neighbour  is  the  forest  king, 

“ The  lion  ; he  is  sick,  nay  well  nigh  dead  : 

“ And  he  was  thinking  who  should  rule  instead 


g 2 


84 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


“ O’er  beasts.  To  find  a pig  with  sense  is  hard  ! 

“ The  bear  is  dull ; and  wrathful  is  the  pard. 

“ The  braggart  tiger  ever  stands  alone. 

“ He  deems  the  stag  is  meetest  for  his  throne. 

“ ’Tis  light  of  form  ; it  lives  unnumber’d  years  ; 

“ Fearful  to  reptiles  is  the  horn  it  rears, 

“ Branching  like  trees,  to  bulls’  horn  un-allied ; 

“ Need  I say  more  ? The  choice  is  ratified. 

“ You  are  to  rule  the  beasts  that  roam  the  hills ; 

“ Oh  ! then,  whene’er  the  throne  your  highness  fills, 

“ Pray  think  of  Reynard,  who  first  let  you  know 
“ These  news.  I’ve  said.  Good-bye,  my  dear  ! I go 
“ To  join  the  lion ; he  may  need  me  back  : 

“ My  counsel  now  in  all  things  he  would  lack. 

“ You’ll  come,  child,  too,  if  the  advice  you  heed 
“ Of  an  old  head.  ’Tis  fitting  you  should  speed 
“ To  counsel  him,  and  cheer  him  in  his  woes  : 

“ Small  things  win  much  at  life’s  extremest  close, 

“ And  souls  are  in  the  eyes  of  them  that  die 

4 

Thus  spake  the  fox.  The  stag’s  heart  leapt  on  high 
At  her  feign’d  words.  He  sought  the  cavern  home 
Of  the  wild  beast,  and  wist  not  what  should  come. 


The  Fables  oj  Babrius. 


85 


Reckless  upsprang  the  lion  from  his  lair, 

And  fail’d,  through  haste,  of  more  than  just  to  tear 
The  stag’s  ear  with  his  talon-tips.  Afraid, 

Straight  from  the  door  it  fled  to  woodland  shade. 
The  fox  to  clap  her  paws  in  spite  was  fain, 

Because  her  labour  had  been  spent  in  vain. 

Gnashing  his  teeth  the  lion  raised  a groan  ; 

Chagrin  and  famine  seiz’d  him,  both  in  one. 

Again  he  call’d  the  fox,  again  he  pray’d 

The  stag  by  some  fresh  trick  might  be  betray’d. 

Revolving  schemes  from  her  heart’s  inmost  core, 

“ I’ll  do  your  will,”  she  said,  “ tho’  hard,  once  more.” 
Then  follow’d  she,  like  sage  dog,  on  the  scent, 
Weaving  her  wily  tricks,  as  on  she  went ; 

Asking  each  shepherd  ever  and  anon, 

“ Knew  he  which  way  a bleeding  stag  had  gone  V9 
Each  that  had  seen  it,  pointing  led  the  way 
To  where,  she  found,  the  fleet  stag  resting  lay, 

Tired  with  the  chase,  in  deeply  shaded  wood, 

And  there  with  forehead  unabash’d  she  stood. 

A shudder  smote  the  stag  in  back  and  knees, 

Wrath  overflow’d  his  heart.  His  words  were  these  : 


86 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


“ Now  you  pursue  me,  wheresoe’er  I fly  : 

“ But,  hated  one,  discomfiture  is  nigh, 

“ If  you  approach,  and  dare  to  mutter  aught. 

“ Go  play  the  fox  to  others  yet  untaught 
“ In  wiles.  Stir  others  up,  and  make  them  reign.” 
But  Reynard  heard  unmoved.  In  blameful  strain 
She  said,  “ Art  thou  so  mean,  so  full  of  fear  ? 

“ And  dost  thou  thus  suspect  associates  dear  % 

“ The  lion  planning  what  might  profit  thee,  | 

“ And  how  to  rouse  thee  from  past  apathy, 

“ Just  touch’d  thine  ear,  a dying  father’s  act, 

“ For  he  desired  no  precept  should  be  lack’d 
“ By  thee  for  keeping  sovereignty  so  great ; 

“ But  thou  his  weak  claw’s  tickling  couldst  not  wait, 
“ And,  tearing  thyself  off,  wast  wounded  sore. 

“ Hence  he,  than  thou,  is  now  offended  more, 

“ For  trial  shows  thee  weak,  unfit  to  trust ; 

“ So  into  kinghood  he  the  wolf  will  thrust. 

“ Ah  me  ! an  evil  lord  ! What  will  befall  1 
“ Thou  art  a cause  of  ills  to  one  and  all. 

“ Nay,  come  and  show  more  courage  than  of  old, 

“ Nor  cower,  like  sheep  just  straying  from  the  fold. 


The  Fables  oj  Babrius . 


87 


“ Now  may  my  oath  by  springs  and  leaves  be  known, 
“ So  may  I subject  be  to  thee  alone, 

“ As  he  intends  no  harm,  but  in  good  will, 

“ Bids  thee  the  lordship  of  the  beasts  to  fill/’ 
Cajoling  thus  the  brocket,  him  she  won 
Into  the  selfsame  fate  again  to  run. 

So  when  he  lay,  inclosed  within  the  lair, 

The  lion  had,  himself,  most  dainty  fare, 

Gorging  the  flesh,  the  marrow  from  each  bone 
And  entrails  lapping.  Famishing,  alone 
Stood  the  decoyer,  till  she  slily  stole 
And  ate  the  heart,  which  near  her  chanc'd  to  roll ; 
The  single  gain  of  all  her  toil  was  this  : 

Which  soon  the  lion,  counting,  came  to  miss, 

Of  all  the  inward  parts.  Indignant  then 
He  search'd  each  lair,  and  hunted  every  den. 

And  Reynard  said,  to  cheat  him  of  the  truth, 

“ Don’t  search  in  vain  ! It  had  no  heart  in  sooth. 

“ To  own  a fine  heart  he  was  likely,  who 
“ A second  time  came  visitor  to  you  ! ” 


88 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


XCVI. 

THE  WOLF  AND  THE  YOUNG  RAM, 

A wolf  pass’d  by  a wall ; and  from  its  top 
A young  ram  peeping  much  abuse  let  drop. 
Gnashing  his  teeth  the  wolf  said  bitterly, 

“ Boast  not  thyself.  Thy  place  abuses  me  !” 

Let  no  one  then,  whom  luck  or  accident 
Makes  strong  awhile,  to  insolence  give  vent. 


XCVII. 

THE  LION  AND  THE  BULL. 

(P.  F.  262.) 

A lion  once  conceiving  a design 

Against  a wild  bull,  feign’d  that  at  the  shrine 

Of  Cybele  he  meant  to  sacrifice, 

And  bade  the  bull ; who,  blind  to  his  device, 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


89 


Promis’d  to  join  the  feast,  and  came  and  stood 
At  his  host’s  door.  Seeing  the  kitchen  strew’d 
With  cauldrons  of  hot  water,  cleavers  bright, 
Sharp  carving-knives,  but  nought  for  food  in  sight, 
Save  a cock  bound,  he  to  the  hills  made  off : 
Much  did  the  lion,  when  he  met  him,  scoff. 

“ Nay,”  said  the  bull,  “ this  token  proves  I came. 

“ Your  ample  kitchens  larger  victims  claim.” 


XCVIII. 

THE  LION  WOOER. 

(p.  F.  249.) 

A lion,  smitten  with  a beauteous  maid, 

Ask’d  her  in  marriage  of  her  sire,  who  said, 

Without  show  of  dislike  or  hollowness, 

“ I’d  give  consent,  and  gladly,  I profess  ! 

“ What  sire  a mighty  lion  would  refuse  ! 

“ But  timid  are  young  maids’  and  children’s  views. 

“ Just  think  how  large  your  teeth  ! how  long  you  wear 
“ Your  talons  ! What  maid,  do  you  think,  will  dare 


9o 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


“ To  clasp  you  boldly,  see  you  unalarm’d  % 

“ If  you  would  wed,  against  these  fears  be  arm’d. 
“ Be  a wild  beast  no  more,  but  suitor  mild.” 

On  wings  of  promise,  by  the  words  beguil’d, 

The  lion  drew  his  teeth,  his  talons  pared 
With  surgeon’s  knife,  then  to  the  sire  repair’d, 
And  showing  them  he  claim’d  his  bride.  But  all 
With  stones  or  clubs  on  him  began  to  fall. 

He  lay  inactive,  e’en  as  dying  swine, 

Taught  by  a crafty  old  man  to  divine, 

That  ’tis  not  nature’s  will  that  men  should  burn 
For  lions,  or  they  love  mankind  in  turn. 


XCIX. 

THE  WOLF  AND  THE  DOG. 
(p.  f.  278.) 

There  met  a wolf  a dog  exceeding  sleek, 
Of  whom  the  former  soon  began  to  seek, 

“ In  what  abode  he  grew  so  fat  and  large.” 
Said  he,  “ I live  at  a rich  master’s  charge.” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


“ But  how/’  said  Wolf,  “ became  thy  neck  so  bare  ? 
“ Rubb’d  by  the  iron  collar  which  I wear  : 

“ My  master  had  it  forg’d,  and  placed  on  me.” 

The  wolf  on  this  made  answer  mockingly : 

“ Adieu  ! for  me,  the  nurture  I refuse, 

“ Through  which  the  iron  is  my  neck  to  bruise.” 


C. 

THE  LION  AND  THE  EAGLE. 

(F.  DE  FURIA,  358.) 

An  eagle  to  a lion  flew,  and  pray’d 

To  be  his  partner.  “What  should  let?”  he  said 

In  answer.  “ Only  you  must  certify, 

“ You  will  not  let  your  faith  take  wings  and  fly  : 
“ On  friend  unsettled  how  could  I rely?” 


92 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


CI. 

THE  WOLF  AND  THE  FOX. 

(P.  F.  272.) 

A fine-grown  wolf  his  tribe  in  size  outvied, 

The  rest  surnamed  him  “ lion.”  Puff’d  with  pride 
He  could  not  bear  renown,  but  left  his  kin, 

And  with  the  lions  friendship  strove  to  win. 

Then  said  a jeering  fox,  “ From  me  be  far 
“ That  frenzy,  in  the  mists  of  which  you  are. 

“ For  you,  no  doubt,  to  wolves  a lion  seem, 

“ But  lions  count  you  wolf,  in  their  esteem.” 

CII. 

THE  LION  RULING  JUSTLY. 

(P.  F.  242.) 

A lion  ruled  : no  brawling  lion  he, 

Nor  fierce,  nor  one  who  used  brute  force  with  glee ; 
But  mild  and  just,  as  any  child  of  man. 

’Twas  in  his  reign,  or  so  the  story  ran, 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


93 


The  wild  beasts  held  a congress,  with  this  aim, 
Each  to  do  justice,  and  receive  the  same. 

And  when  each  brute  accounted,  as  by  law, 
Wolves  to  the  lambs,  the  pard  to  the  chamois, 
Tiger  to  stag,  and  peace  pervaded  all, 

A cow’ring  hare  said,  “ Ever  did  I call 
“ Upon  the  gods,  to  grant  this  day  ere  long, 

“ Which  makes  the  weak  a terror  to  the  strong.” 

cm. 

THE  SICK  LION  AND  THE  WILD  BEASTS . 
(P.  F.  246.) 

A lion  hunting  could  no  longer  go, 

He  had  grown  old  full  many  a year  ago. 

So  in  his  cave  he  laid  him,  feigning  sick, 

And  gasping,  not  in  truth,  ;twas  all  a trick. 

His  once  deep  voice  now  seem’d  so  faint  and  low  : 
Quickly  did  Rumour  to  each  beast’s  den  go ; 

Her  tale,  the  lion’s  sickness,  grieved  them  all, 

And  each  went  in,  on  the  old  king  to  call. 


94 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


These,  in  their  turn,  he  took  with  ease,  though  weak, 
And,  feasting  on  them,  found  his  age  grow  sleek. 

Yet  one,  who  guess’d  his  trick,  a fox,  afar 
Ask’d,  “ Prythee,  good  my  liege,  say  how  you  are  ?” 
He  answer’d,  “ Best  of  creatures,  how  d’ye  do  ? 

“ Come  nearer,  nor  from  far  your  old  friend  view. 

“ Come,  sweet  one,  with  the  balm  your  words  can  ' 
give, 

“ And  comfort  me  who  have  not  long  to  live.” 

Said  fox,  “ Good-bye,  my  leaving  you’ll  forgive ; 

“ I must  be  off,  forewarn’d  by  many  a track 
“ Of  beasts,  which  you  can  scarcely  prove  came  back.” 

He  that  is  taught  by  strange  calamity 
And  is  not  first  in  falling,  blest  is  he  ! 


t 


The  Fables  oj  Babrius. 


95 


CIV. 

THE  DOG  BEARING  THE  BELL. 

(P.  F.  224.) 

A dog  was  fond  of  biting  “ on  the  sly,” 

Whose  master,  this  ill  trick  to  notify 
Abroad,  a brazen  bell  around  him  tied. 

On  this  the  dog  began  to  ring  with  pride 
His  bell  in  every  square.  Then  to  him  said 
An  elder  dog,  “ Why  proudly  lift  your  head, 

“ Poor  wretch  i no  badge  of  worth  you  sound  in  this, 
“ But  a plain  proof  of  what  you  do  amiss.” 

CV. 

THE  WOLF  AND  THE  LION. 

(p.  F.  279.) 

A wolf  was  bearing  home  a sheep  one  day 
Snatch’d  from  the-»fold.  A lion  in  the  way 
Captur’d  his  spoil.  The  wolf,  far  off,  made  moan  : 

“ Wrongly ,”  he  cried,  “ you’ve  robb’d  me  of  my  own.” 


96 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


The  mocking  lion  answer'd  with  delight ; 

“ Of  course  ’twas  given  by  friends,  and  your’s  by  right” 


CVI. 

THE  GENTLE  LION. 

A lion  once  the  noblest  life  of  men 
Would  emulate,  and  in  his  spacious  den 
“ At  home,”  with  kindness  to  entreat  essay’d 
All  the  best  kinds  of  beasts  of  hill  or  glade. 
Large  grew  the  crowd  of  various  brutes  apace, 
For  which  his  kindly  “ menage”  found  a space  : 
While  each  he  loved  and  feasted  as  a guest, 
Meting  to  all  the  food  they  fancied  best, 

He ’d  ta’en  a friendly  fox  his  den  to  share, 

With  whom  his  life  was  mostly  smooth  and  fair ; 
But  carver  to  him  was  an  ancient  ape, 

Each  messmate’s  share  to  parcel  out  and  shape. 
This  ape,  if  guest  unwonted  cross’d  the  door, 

Set  the  same  meal  his  lord  and  him  before, 

The  lion’s  chase  some  recent  spoil  had  ta’en, 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


97 


While  Reynard  did  but  scraps  of  stale  meat  gain. 
So  when  a purposed  silence  she  maintain’d, 

And  now  from  food  and  feast  her  paws  restrain’d, 
Her  conduct’s  motive  fain  the  host  would  seek : 

“ Sage  fox,  in  wonted  fashion,  prythee,  speak ; 

“ Share,  dearest,  share  the  feast  with  cheerful  face.” 
“ Best,”  cried  the  fox,  “ of  all  the  wild-beast  race, 

“ With  much  solicitude  I waste  my  heart ; 

“ Nor  do  things  present  merely  cause  the  smart ; 

“ But  what  is  coming,  I with  grief  foresee  : 

“ For  if  fresh  guests  come  hither  constantly, 

“ One  after  other,  and  this  habit  grows, 

“ I shall  miss  even  stale  meat,  I suppose.” 

A lion’s  smile  o’er  the  pleased  lion  came : 

“ I told  the  ape  so.  Me  then  do  not  blame.” 


H 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


98 

CVII. 

THE  LION  AND  THE  MOUSE. 

<p.  F.  256.) 

To  dine  on  captured  mouse  a lion  thought : 

But  on  the  verge  of  fate  the  wretch  besought 
(Poor  household  thief)  the  beast,  in  words  of  fear; 

“ ’Twere  meet  that,  hunting  horned  bulls  and  deer, 

“ With  suchlike  meat  you  should  your  paunch  make 
fat ; 

“ But  a poor  mouse  ! ’tis  wrong  such  food  as  that 
“ Should  ever  touch  your  lips.  Oh,  spare  me,  pray  ! 

“ Small  as  I am,  this  boon  I may  repay.” 

The  beast  let  go  his  suppliant  with  a smile ; 

But,  himself  netted  in  a little  while, 

By  youthful  hunters  he  was  made  secure. 

Slyly  the  mouse  stole  to  an  aperture, 

Nibbled  with  tiniest  teeth  the  sturdy  twine, 

And  let  the  beast  again  see  daylight  shine, 

Unbound  : requiting  thus  his  former  gift. 

To  men  of  sense  plain  is  our  fable’s  drift. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


99 


CVIII. 

THE  COUNTRY  MOUSE  AND  TOWN  MOUSE . 
(p.  F.  297.) 

Two  mice,  of  whom  one  spent  a-field  his  day, 

The  other’s  hole  in  rich  town  storehouse  lay, 

To  have  their  food  in  common  both  agreed : 

And  so  the  town-bred  mouse  came  first,  to  feed 
Where  now  the  field  was  fresh  with  verdant  fruits  ; 
And  nibbling  there  the  moist  and  bitter  roots 
Of  corn,  from  dingy  clods  by  no  means  free, 

“ The  life  of  wretched  ant  is  yours,”  said  he, 

“ Eating  scant  barley  in  the  depths  of  earth. 

“ For  me — I find  much  plenty  and  no  dearth. 

“ I dwell  in  plenty’s  horn,  compared  with  you. 

“ Come  and  feast  freely,  as  you’d  wish  to  do, 

“ Leaving  the  moles  to  burrow  in  the  soil.” 

He  won  the  simple  mouse  from  rustic  toil, 

Men’s  homes  to  enter,  ’neath  their  walls  to  bore ; 
And  show’d  him  where  there  is  of  pulse  a store, 


h 2 


TOO 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


A cask  of  figs,  and  where  the  meal-bags  are ; 

Where  the  date-chest,  and  where  the  honey-jar. 

When,  spurr’d  and  much  delighted  by  all  these, 

He  from  a basket  dragg’d  a piece  of  cheese, 

Lo  ! some  one  oped  the  door  ; away  he  leapt, 

And  trembling,  to  his  hole’s  aperture  crept, 

Crowding  his  host,  and  venting  hideous  squeaks., 

But  in  a while  from  his  retreat  he  sneaks, 

Intent  a Camircean  fig  to  taste ; 

But,  after  something,  upon  them  in  haste 

Came  some  one  else.  They  hid.  The  country  mouse 

Said,  “ Feast,  and  fare  you  well,  in  plenty’s  house  : 

“ Of  these  abundant  revels  take  your  fill ; 

“ You’ll  find  them  mainly  fraught  with  risk  and  ill. 

“ Meanwhile,  desert  my  smooth  clod  will  not  I, 

“ Where  I munch  barley,  and  all  fears  defy ! ” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


i 


CIX. 

THE  CRAB  AND  ITS  MOTHER . 

(p.  f.  187.) 

“ Don’t  walk  aslant,  nor  o’er  the  moist  rock  draw 
“ Crosswise,”  its  dam  said  to  the  crab,  “ thy  claw.” 
“ Nay,  first,”  cried  he,  “ Mother  and  mentor  too, 

“ Walk  straight  yourself : I ’ll  watch  and  follow  you 


CX. 

THE  DOG  AND  HIS  MASTER. 

(P.  F.  227.) 

“ Gape  not,”  a man  about  to  travel  cried 
To  his  dog  near  him  ; “but  to  start  provide  ; 

“ For  you  must  go  with  me.”  It  wagg’d  its  tail, 
And  said,  “ I’m  right ! ’Tis  you  in  quickness  fail.” 


102 


The  Tables  of  Babrius. 


CXI. 

THE  ASS  CARRYING  SALT 
(P.  F.  322.) 

A huckster,  who  contrived  an  ass  to  keep, 

Hearing  that  salt  on  the  sea-coast  was  cheap, 

Chose  to  invest  in  it.  With  goodly  load 
Homeward  he  drove.  When  fairly  on  the  road, 

Into  a stream  the  ass  unconscious  rolled, 

And,  the  salt  melting,  had  no  weight  t’  uphold, 

So  rose  with  greater  ease,  and  lightly  sought 
And  reach’d  the  bank.  More  salt  the  owner  bought 
Again  he  brought  his  ass  to  load  : again 
Piled  his  bags  heavier.  Then,  in  toil  and  pain, 
Crossing  the  stream  that  caused  his  former  fall, 

The  ass,  on  purpose,  slipt,  lost  salt  and  all ; 

And,  at  his  luck  triumphant,  lightly  rose. 

Now  did  the  huckster  a new  scheme  propose ; 

’Twas  this  : — “ To  carry  inland  from  the  sea 
“ Whole  loads  of  porous  sponges  : salt-bags  he 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


103 


“ Was  sick  of.”  So  the  ass,  in  knavish  sort, 

When  to  the  stream  again  his  load  he  brought, 
Fell  down  on  purpose.  Every  sponge  was  soak’d 
At  once,  and  he  to  heavier  burden  yoked  ; 

Home  on  his  back  he  bore  a double  bale. 

Where  men  have  oft  succeeded,  they  may  fail. 


CXII. 

THE  MOUSE  AND  THE  BULL . 

A bull  was  bitten  by  a mouse.  In  pain 
He  tried  to  catch  it : but  ’twas  first  to  gain 
The  mouse-hole.  With  his  horns,  to  raze  its  walls, 
The  bull  essays,  until  asleep  he  falls, 

Sinking,  fatigued,  hard  by.  Forth  straightway  hies 
The  peeping  mouse,  bites  him  again,  and  flies. 
Uprose  the  bull,  perplext  what  now  to  do, 

And  the  mouse  squeak’d  to  him  this  moral  true  : 

“ Not  always  mighty  are  the  great.  ’Tis  seen 
“ Sometimes,  that  stronger  are  the  small  and  mean.” 


104 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


CXIII. 

THE  SHEPHERD  AND  THE  DOG, . 

(P.  f.  371.) 

A man  about  to  fold  his  sheep  at  eve, 

Was  going  a yellow  wolf  with  them  to  leave 
Penn’d  up.  The  sheep-dog  saw,  and  said,  “What 
haste 

“ To  save  the  sheep,  you  bring  him  in  to  waste  ?” 


CXIV. 

THE  LAMP. 

(p.  F.  285.) 

A lamp  that  swam  with  oil,  began  to  boast 
At  eve,  that  it  outshone  the  starry  host, 

And  gave  most  light  to  all.  Her  boast  was  heard  : 
Soon  the  wind  whistled  : soon  the  breezes  stirred, 
And  quench’d  its  light.  A man  rekindled  it, 

And  said,  “ Brief  is  the  faint  lamp’s  boasting-fit, 

“ But  the  star-light  ne’er  needs  to  be  re-lit.” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


105 


cxv. 

THE  TORTOISE  AND  THE  EAGLE. 

(p.  F.  419.) 

Once  to  the  divers,  gulls,  and  wild  sea-mews 
A sluggish  tortoise  thus  expressed  her  views. 

“ Would  that  I,  too,  had  had  the  luck  to  fly !” 

An  eagle  chanced  to  hear,  and  made  reply : 

“ Tortoise,  how  much  shall  be  the  eagle’s  prize, 

“ If  to  the  air  he  makes  thee  lightly  rise  V9 
“ Thou  shalt  have  all  and  each  of  ocean’s  gifts !” 

“ Agreed  ! ” the  eagle  cries,  and  lightly  lifts 
The  other  to  the  clouds,  upon  her  back, 

Then  lets  her  fall,  and  on  the  hill-side  crack 
Her  brittle  coat  of  shell.  He  heard  her  cry, 

At  the  last  gasp  : “ I well  deserve  to  die  ! 

“ Where  was  to  me  of  clouds  and  wings  the  need, 

“ Who  on  my  mother  earth  could  make  no  speed?” 


io6 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


CXVI. 

THE  HUSBAND  AND  THE  GALLANT 

A Youth  was  singing  sweetly  at  mid-night : 

A wife  that  heard  him,  rose,  and  in  delight 
Peep’d  from  her  windows,  whence  a view  she  had, 
By  the  bright  moon-beam,  of  a handsome  lad. 

She  therefore  left  her  spouse  asleep  to  snore, 

Came  down  the  halls,  and  passed  without  the  door, 
And  quickly  gain’d  the  object  she  desired. 

Her  husband  rose  in  haste  : his  eyes  enquir’d 
Where  was  his  mate,  whom  in  the  home  he  lack’d  i 
Soon  did  the  song  his  doubting  steps  attract. 

Then  cried  he  to  his  wife,  “ Be  not  dismay’d, 

“ This  youth  within  our  house  to  sleep  persuade.” 
He  took  him  in  : the  youth  found  both  were  bent 
To  please,  and  of  the  wife  grew  negligent. 

So  runs  the  fable.  Read  its  moral  right, 

’Tis  ill  to  triumph,  when  one  may  requite. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


CXVII. 

THE  MAN  AND  MERCURY, 

(p,  F.  xi 8.) 

The  sea  engulfed  a ship  and  all  its  crew, 

Which  one  beholding  this  conclusion  drew, 

“ That  the  gods  rule  unjustly  : for  that  they 
“ A host  of  harmless  men  agreed  to  slay, 

“ Because  one  godless  wretch  was  in  the  ship.” 
But  as  the  words  were  just  upon  his  lip, 

A swarm  of  ants  surprised  him,  urged  by  haste 
(’Tis  nothing  strange),  some  barley  chaff  to  taste. 
Stung  by  one  ant,  on  all  the  grumbler  trod  : 
Hermes  appear’d,  and  tapp’d  him  with  his  rod. 
Said  he,  “ Will  you  not  let  the  Gods  then  do 
“ To  you  that  justice,  the  ants  meet  from  you  V 


io8 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


CXVIII. 

THE  SWALLOW  THAT  DWELT  NEAR  THE 
JUDGES. 

(p.  f.  418.) 

Accustom'd  ever  to  men’s  haunts  to  cling, 

Her  nest  a tawny  swallow  built  in  spring 
On  walls,  that  skirted  some  old  judges’  homes; 
Where  of  seven  nestlings  mother  she  becomes ; 
Nestlings,  unfringed  with  purplish  feathers  yet ; 
And  these,  each  one  in  turn,  a serpent  ate, 
Gliding  from  out  his  hole.  The  bird  forlorn 
Forthwith  began,  in  words  like  these,  to  mourn 
For  her  ill-fated  babes,  untimely  ta’en  : 

“ Alas,  my  sad  fate,”  thus  did  she  complain, 

“ Since,  where  men’s  laws  and  ordinances  are, 

“ Thence  a poor  swallow,  injured,  flies  afar.” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


109 


CXIX. 

THE  IMAGE  OF  MERCURY. 

A man,  a craftsman,  cherish’d,  wrought  in  wood, 

A Hermes,  before  whom  each  day  he  stood 
With  offerings  of  meat  and  drink  : yet  still, 

Much  to  his  indignation,  he  fared  ill. 

He  took  the  image  by  its  leg,  and  dash’d 

It  on  the  ground ; so  when  its  head  was  smash’d, 

Out  fell  some  gold.  He  pick’d  it  up,  and  said, 

“ Ungrateful  God  to  friends,  and  wrong  of  head  ! 

“ For  when  we  served  thee,  thou  didst  nowise  aid, 

“ But  when  we  scoff’d,  our  wrongs  with  good  hast 
paid. 

“ Would  I had  known  before  that  nought  was  due, 

“ Save  this  new  service,  Mercury,  to  you.” 

In  fables  H£sop  gods  doth  introduce, 

To  teach  us  how  to  act  in  daily  use. 

Honour  to  cross-grain’d  folks  is  toil  in  vain ; 

Insult  them,  and  their  kindnesses  you  gain. 


no 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


cxx. 

THE  FROG  PHYSICIAN. 

(P.  F.  78.) 

That  tenant  of  the  swamp,  and  friend  of  shade. 
The  frog,  who  in  the  dykes  his  dwelling  made, 
Came  on  dry  land,  and  thus  each  creature  told  : 

“ I am  a doctor,  who  the  science  hold 
“ Of  drugs  more  rare  than  Pcean’s  art  can  reach, 

“ Whom  high  Olympus  deems  the  heavenly  leech.” 
“ How  then,”  asked  Reynard,  “ if  you  others  cure, 
“ Your  own  sad  lameness  come  you  to  endure?” 


CXXI. 

THE  HEN  AND  THE  CA  T. 

(p.  F.  16.) 

A hen  was  sick.  To  her  a cat  inclined 

Her  head.  “ How  do  1 For  what  have  you  a mind 

" I’ll  get  you  all  you  wish.  But  don’t  say  ‘ die  ! ’ ” 

“ If  you’ll  be  off,”  said  she,  “ that  will  not  I.” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


hi 


CXXII. 

THE  ASS  AND  THE  WOLF, 

(p-  F.  334-) 

An  ass  went  lame,  from  treading  on  a stake ; 

He  spied  a wolf,  and  fearing  he  might  take 
Death  for  his  certain  doom,  said,  “Wolf,  I die  : 

“ Hear  my  last  breath  : I’d  rather  thou  wert  nigh 
“To  sup  on  me,  than  vulture,  or  than  crow. 

“ Yet  this  slight  harmless  boon  on  me  bestow; 

“ The  splinter  from  my  foot  extract,  I pray ; 

“ That  paiilless  thus  my  soul  may  wing  its  way 
“To  Hades.”  “ This  I grudge  not,”  he  replied. 

T’  extract  the  stake  his  teeth  their  aid  supplied. 

But  now  the  ass,  his  pain  and  anguish  sped, 

Kick’d  the  gray  gaping  wolf,  and  turn’d,  and  fled, 
When  he  had  bump’d  his  snout,  and  grinders  too. 

“ Ah  ! ” said  the  wolf,  “ this  luck  to  me  is  due  ! 

“ Why  was  it  that  to  cure  the  lame  I took, 

“ Who  from  the  first  knew  nought,  but  how  to  cook?” 


1 1 2 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


CXXIII. 

THE  HEN  THAT  LAID  GOLDEN  EGGS. 

(p-  F-  343-) 

When  golden  eggs  a fine  hen  daily  laid, 

Its  owner  thought  to  find  his  fortune  made 
From  endless  treasure  in  its  bowels  stored  : 

He  slaughter'd  it,  to  pounce  upon  the  hoard. 

Its  inward  parts  like  other  birds  he  found, 

And  mourn’d  his  baffled  hopes  with  grief  profound. 

Thus  oftentimes  doth  greediness  of  more 
Rob  men  of  even  what  they  had  before. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


”3 


CXXIY. 

[Compare  Part  II.  Fable  LII.] 

THE  TRAVELLER  AND  TRUTH. 

(p-  F-  3I4*) 

In  a lone  spot,  with  no  one  by  her  side, 

And  much  cast  down,  a traveller  espied 
A noble  dame,  who  seem’d  in  evil  case. 

Said  he,  “ Why  dost  thou  tarry  in  this  place  ? 

‘ What  ails  thee,  lady  1 Who  art  thou,  in  sooth  ? ” 

“ If  thou  wouldst  know,”  she  answer’d,  “ I am  Truth !” 
At  this  amazed,  the  traveller  ask’d  her,  “ Why, 

“ Haunting  lone  spots,  from  cities  dost  thou  fly  ? ” 

To  which  the  goddess  of  deep  mind  replied, 

“ Because  aforetime  there  were  few  that  lied. 

“ But  now  hath  falsehood  spread  o’er  all  mankind,  1 
“ And  if  thou’lt  hear,  and  I may  speak  my  mind,  > 
“ Man’s  life  in  these  days  evil  we  shall  find.”  J 


ii4 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


CXXV. 

THE  ASS  AND  THE  LAP-DOG. 

[Compare  Part  II.  Fable  LIV.] 

(P.  F.  331.  F.  DE  FURIA,  367,  P.  150.) 

A man  a Maltese  dog  kept,  and  an  ass ; 

The  latter,  as  was  usual,  corn  and  grass 
Ate  in  a courtyard,  to  a manger  tied ; 

But  graceful  gambols  were  the  pet-dog’s  pride, 

While  round  its  lord  with  various  leaps  it  pressed, 
And  oft  by  him  was  fondled  in  his  breast,  > 

A pleasant  toy,  of  solaces  the  best 
The  ass  meanwhile  was  used  to  grind  by  night 
The  grain  of  Ceres,  fetching,  while  ’twas  light, 

Wood  from  the  hill,  things  needful  from  the  field ; 
Hence  did  his  spirit  to  sore  anguish  yield 
To  see  the  whelp  in  luxury’s  own  lap. 

Losing  no  time  his  manger’s  bonds  to  snap, 

With  awkward  capers  to  the  hall  he  came, 

With  what  strange  fawning  ! What  attempts  at  game 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


The  table  thrown  into  the  midst  he  smash’d, 

And  all  the  plates  at  once  to  atoms  dash’d. 

Next,  near  his  master  as  he  supp’d,  he  drew, 

His  hoofs,  to  hug  him,  o’er  his  back  he  threw  : 
But  now  the  servants  marking  how  he  fared 
From  this  rough  usage  that  the  ass  had  dared, 

To  save  their  master,  interposing,  rushed 
And  rescued  him,  when  he  was  well-nigh  crush’d. 
Then,  as  the  ass  was  gasping  his  last  breath, 

(With  cornel  clubs  they  beat  him  near  to  death,) 
Said  he,  “ As  I deserv’d,  a luckless  ass, 

“ I suffer  ! Wherefore  did  I scorn  to  pass 
“ My  days  among  the  mules  h Why,  wretchedly, 
“ A tiny  lap-dog’s  rival  strive  to  be  ? ” 

All  are  not  fit  for  every  fate,  be  sure  : 

Nor  is  the  lot  of  envious  men  secure  ! 


ii  6 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


CXXVI. 

THE  PLA  YFUL  ASS. 

(F.  DE  FURIA,  368,  P.  15 1.) 

Mounting  a roof,  an  ass  the  tiling  broke 
With  his  rough  sport;  whom  with  a switch’s  stroke 
A man  compell’d  his  downward  course  to  track. 
The  ass  to  him  who  outraged  thus  his  back 
Remark’d,  “ Why,  yesterday,  and  ere  that  too, 

“ An  ape  by  this  same  sport  delighted  you.” 


CXXVII. 

THE  FOWLER,  PARTRIDGE,  AND  COCK. 

(f.  de  furia,  369.) 

Upon  a bird-catcher  a friend  dropt  in, 

His  meal  of  herbs  just  going  to  begin. 

Nought  had  the  bird-cage.  Nothing  had  he  caught. 
So  he  to  slay  a speckled  partridge  thought, 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


ii7 

A bird  he’d  tamed  and  kept  for  a decoy ; 

But  thus  it  pray’d  that  he  would  not  destroy 
Its  life  : “ How  will  you  manage  with  your  net 
“ In  fowling  henceforth  ? Who  for  you  will  get 
“ Together  a bright  flock  of  social  birds  ? 

“ To  the  sweet  music  of  what  minstrel’s  words 
“ Will  you  repose  ? ” He  set  the  partridge  free, 

And  chose  a bearded  cock  for  butchery. 

But  from  its  perch  a crowing  voice  was  borne, 

“ Whence  will  you  learn,  how  much  it  wants  to  morn, 
“ When  you  have  slain  the  hour-seer  ? or  know, 

“ When  sleeps  Orion  of  the  golden  bow? 

“ Who  shall  of  morning  duties  monish  you, 

“ What  time  the  bird-trap  now  is  moist  with  dew  ? ” 

“ True  ! you,”  quoth  he,  “the  useful  hours  divine, 

“ Yet  must  my  friend  have  wherewithal  to  dine  ! ” 


ix8 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


CXXVIIL 

[Compare  Part  II.  Fable  LI.  J 

JUPITER  THE  JUDGE . 

(p.  f.  152.) 

Jove  order’d  Hermes  to  write  each  man’s  sin 
On  earthen  tablets,  and  to  pile  them  in 
A coffer  : thus  to  make  bad  men  atone. 

But  as  the  tablets  in  a heap  were  thrown, 
Into  Jove’s  hands,  at  every  settling  day, 

Some  quickly,  others  slowly  find  their  way. 
We  must  not  therefore  be  surprised,  if  some 
Early  do  ill,  but  late  to  judgment  come. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


CXXIX. 

THE  ANT  AND  THE  GRASSHOPPER. 

(p.  F.  401.) 

In  winter  time,  an  ant  dragged  forth,  to  dry, 

Some  corn,  by  him  last  summer  heap’d  on  high. 

A starved  grasshopper  begg’d  that  he  would  give 
Some  share  to  it,  lest  it  should  cease  to  live. 

“ What  did  you,”  asked  he,  “ all  the  summer  long  ? 
“ I lagg’d  not,  but  was  constant  in  my  song.” 
Laughing,  the  ant  said,  as  he  barr’d  his  wheat, 

“ Dance  in  the  cold,  since  you  sang  in  the  heat ! ” 

Of  needful  things  ’tis  better  thought  to  take, 

Than  joy  and  revels  our  mind’s  study  make. 


120 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


FRAGMENT  I. 

THE  SHEEP  AND  THE  SHEPHERD . 
(LACHMANN,  130.  P.  F.  317.) 

[Compare  Part  II.  Fab.  LIII.] 

A sheep  one  day  addressed  its  shepherd  thus  : 

“ You  keep  our  fleeces  after  shearing  us ; 

“ Our  teeming  milk  you  drain,  and  turn  to  cheese. 

“ Your  countless  lambs,  our  young,  not  yours , are 
these ; 

“ We  get  no  gain,  I wot ! But  all  the  earth, 

“ E’en  on  the  hills,  for  thee  gives  verdure  birth, 

“ Gives  tender  herbage,  laden  with  the  dew ; 

“ These  are  our  food,  yet  at  no  cost  to  you. 

“ Yon  dog  the  while  midst  us,  to  you  so  cheap, 

“ On  as  good  food  as  feeds  yourself,  you  keep. 

The  dog  o’erheard  and  said,  “ Were  I elsewhere 
“ And  not  amongst  you,  yours  were  sorry  fare. 

“ Now,  running  round  about  you  every  way, 

“ The  inroads  of  the  wolf  and  thief  I stay.” 


END  OF  PART  I. 


THE 

FABLES  OF  BABRIUS. 


PART  II. 


FABLE  I. 

PROEM. 

Son,  to  this  second  book  thine  ear  incline. 

% 

Should  it  embitter  thee  far  more  than  brine, 

Yet  afterward  a sweeter  taste  I leave 
Than  honey.  Yet  not  me,  I pray,  receive 
As  him  that  spake  these  fables.  They  belong 
To  Sardian  ^Esop,  whom  most  grievous  wrong, 

And  god-abhorr’d,  at  Delphian  hands  befell. 

So  ill  they  treated  one  who  sang  so  well. 

Fools  that  they  were,  they  forced  him  down  a steep, 
And  left  their  sons  a hateful  name  to  keep. 


124 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


II.  L^f\ 

THE  LARK  BURYING  ITS  FATHER . 

(P.  F.  2 1 1.  Aristoph.  Av.  471,  &c.) 

Among  old  saws  this  also  iEsop  said  : 

’Ere  other  birds,  ’ere  e’en  the  earth  was  made, 

A first  existence  had  the  tufted  lark ; 

Whose  darling  child  reach’d  life’s  allotted  mark, 
And  death,  it  chanced,  by  some  disorder  met. 
Now,  as  the  earth  was  not  in  being  yet, 

She  knew  not  where,  (how  should  she  1 ) to  inter 
Her  dead.  Five  days  ’twas  left  expos’d  by  her  : 
Then,  sore  perplex’t,  for  grave  she  lent  her  head. 

’Tis  holy,  gather  hence,  t’  entomb  the  dead: 

And  filial  love  is  a time-honour’d  thing, 

Of  laws  the  best ; and  nature’s  ordering. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


125 


f 

III. 

AESOP  IN  A DOCKYARD. 

(p.  F.  19.) 

At  leisure  to  indulge  in  seeing  sights, 

The  gaze  of  JEsop  on  a dockyard  lights. 

He  chanced  on  shipwrights  there,  with  nought  to  do, 
Who  at  the  sage  their  gibes  full  rudely  threw, 

And  by  their  mocking  challenged  his  reply. 

His  words  in  this  not  pointless  fable  lie. 

“ Chaos  and  Water  from  the  first  had  been  ; 

“ But  Jove  desired  that  Earth,  till  then  unseen, 

“ Above  the  mass  of  waters  should  arise  : 

“ Then  did  he  her  c to  swallow  thrice'  advise 
“ ‘ The  waterfloods.’  At  the  first  draught  she  made, 

“ Behold  the  mountains  in  their  height  display’d. 

“ When  now  the  earth  her  second  gulp  had  ta'en, 

“ Naked  to  view  stood  many  a grassy  plain. 

“ And  should  she  soon  to  take  a third  see  fit 
“ Your  craft,  methinks,  will  straight  her  craftsmen  quit.” 


126 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


Who  use  to  betters  silly  words  and  light, 
Alway  against  themselves  the  laugh  invite. 


An  eagle  once  was  netted  by  a hind ; 

Who,  having  clipp’d  its  wings,  no  more  confined 
Its  freedom  midst  the  birds  about  his  cot. 

A fowler  soon  this  bird  by  purchase  got, 

Let  its  wings  grow,  that  late  had  been  cut  short, 
And  kept  it  thus  for  purposes  of  sport. 

Soon  it  essay’d  a flight,  and  seized  a hare, 

A gift  ’twas  glad  to  its  new  lord  to  bear. 

A fox  looked  on,  and  to  the  eagle  said  : 

“ To  thy  first  lord,  not  this,  be  honour  paid, 

“ Lest  he  again  should  catch  thee  in  his  toil, 

“ And  thee,  by  clipping,  of  thy  wings  despoil.” 


IV. 


THE  EAGLE  AND  THE  MAN 

(p.  f.  6.) 


These  words  the  sacred  eagle’s  answer  are  : 

“ Good  men  I must  respect,  from  bad  keep  far; 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


127 


V. 

THE  GOAT  AMD  THE  VINE. 
(p.  f.  404.) 


37  i 


A vine  with  foliage  and  ripe  clusters  bloom’d. 

Its  shoots  a goat  with  nibbling  tooth  consumed, 
Whom  thus  the  vine  addrest : “ Why  injure  me  h 

“ And  browse  my  leaves  ? Is  there  no  grass  for  thee  ? 
“ Yet  thou  ere  long  thy  just  deserts  shalt  meet. 

“ Though  now  my  shoots  thou  to  the  quick  dost  eat, 
“To  me  no  less  shall  satisfaction  rise, 

“ When  juice  o’er  thee  I pour  in  sacrifice.” 


vi. 


THE  LION  AND  THE  MAN. 
(P.  f.  63. ) 

A lion  and  a man,  together  thrown, 
Held  conversation  each  in  boastful  tone. 
Their  gaze,  in  walking,  on  a statue  lit, 

A man  astride  a lion,  strangling  it. 


128 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


The  man  this  sculpture  bade  the  lion  see, 

And  said,  “ O’er  lions  note  our  mastery.” 

“Nay,”  said  the  beast,  “if  lions  only  knew 
“ The  sculptor’s  art,  on  mortals  not  a few 
“By  lions  crush’d  and  strangled  you  might  gaze.” 

Each  doth  himself  in  his  own  talk  be-praise. 

VII.  3 ^ ^ 

THE  SWAN  AND  THE  GOOSE. 

(r.  f.  215.) 

To  feed  a swan,  one  purchase  with  a goose, 

A different  reason  did  a man  induce. 

One  for  the  table,  one  for  song  was  fed. 

So  when  he  came  the  goose’s  blood  to  shed, 

(It  had  been  fatted  for  its  master’s  board,) 

Night,  drawing  on,  her  film  o’er  all  things  pour’d. 

Best  of  all  times  for  catching  birds  is  night ; 

Yet  fail’d  the  owner  to  distinguish  right 

Which  was  the  swan,  and  which  the  goose  might  be — - 

Hence  for  the  goose,  by  accident  left  free, 


The  Falles  of  Bcihrius . 


129 


Away  to  doom  the  tuneful  swan  was  led ; 
But  when  his  song  his  species  heralded, 
That  song  was  able  to  postpone  his  end* 

Speech  used  in  season  many  doth  befriend. 


VIII. 

THE  FROGS.  Lj.  2 

(p.  f.  74.) 

In  marshy  swamp  two  frogs  were  wont  to  bide. 
When  in  the  summer  season  this  was  dried, 
They  left  it,  for  another  home  to  look, 

And  in  their  road  a wTell  of  water  took. 
Beholding  this,  thus  spake  the  first  of  these  : 

“ Into  this  well  descend  we,  if  you  please, 

“ Since  both  for  food  and  dwelling  it  bids  fair.” 
The  other  said,  with  blame-suggestive  air, 


K 


130 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


“ Nay,  but  suppose  this  too  should  chance  to  fail, 
“ How  from  a depth  so  great  could  we  avail 
“ To  re-ascend  ? ” 

Hence  learn  a moral  true, 
Without  forethought  ’tis  useless  aught  to  do. 


IX. 

THE  FROGS  ASHING  A KING. 

(p.  F.  7 6.) 

The  curse  of  anarchy  the  frogs  annoy'd  ; 

Who  to  Heaven’s  throne  an  embassy  employ’d, 
To  ask,  if  Jove  would  furnish  them  a king. 

He  knew  the  frog  was  but  a silly  thing  ; 

So  order’d  Hermes  right  into  the  bog 
To  throw,  for  king  of  croakers,  a mute  log. 

As  the  log  fell,  the  waters  felt  the  blow, 

And  the  frogs  hasten’d  to  the  depths  below, 

In  terror  for  the  moment  at  the  sound. 

But  a short  space,  after  these  things,  went  round  ; 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 1 3 1 

And  when  they  saw  their  sovereign  motionless, 

They  cast  off  fear,  scorn  only  to  profess ; 

So  much  so,  that  on  it  they  boldly  stept, 

And  mounted  there,  seats  undisputed  kept. 

Such  king  to  own,  occasion’d  high  disdain ; 

And  up  they  went  to  the  Gods’  courts  again, 

Where  they  the  chief  of  rulers  much  besought 
To  send  them  such  a monarch  as  they  ought 
To  have.  “ That  beam  was  quite  unfit  to  sway 
“ Mute  logs,  far  more  such  living  beings  as  they. 

“ That  stump  was  grown  but  to  be  food  for  fire.” 
Next  Jove  sent  down  an  eel  for  their  desire. 

They  saw  that  this  was  also  a mere  fool, 

And  would  not  have  it  over  them  to  rule. 

A third  legation  then  they  sent  to  Jove, 

With  earnest  pray’r  their  second  king  to  move, 

And  give  them  one  with  better  sense  supplied, 

Fitly  o’er  them  with  justice  to  preside. 

Their  message,  heard,  led  Jove  offence  to  take, 

And  send  them  for  their  king  a water-snake ; 

Who,  getting  all  in  turn  within  his  power, 

Did  each  poor  frog  with  ruthless  maw  devour ; 


k 2 


132 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


No  more  to  cry  “coax,”  no  more  to  croak  ! 

Such  fate  too  many  of  mankind  provoke, 
When  from  old  rulers  they  their  love  revoke. 


X. 


THE  ARCHER  AND  THE  EAGLE . 

(P.  F.  4.) 

An  archer  at  an  eagle  took  his  aim. 

The  shaft  he  sent,  true  to  the  eagle  came. 

To  whom  when,  as  he  turn’d  his  head,  ?twas  known, 
The  shaft  was  wing’d  with  feathers  of  his  own ; 

“ Ah  ! luckless  me  ! ” his  dying  accents  said ; 

“ With  mine  own  feathers  I have  made  my  bed.” 

y 

1 

Most  from  their  own,  much  loss  have  suffered.  J 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


!33 


^ A 
xi. 

THE  OXEN  AND  THE  WAGON. 

[Compare  Part  I.  Fable  LII,  P.  F.  79.  ] 

Their  wain  some  oxen  to  a village  drew, 

And  at  its  creaking  axle  wrathful  grew. 

Turning  to  it,  they  said,  “ Why  creak  you  thus  ? 

“ When  all  the  burden  has  been  laid  on  us.” 

When  others  work,  some  call  the  toil  their  own, 

And,  over  what  they  had  no  hand  in,  moan. 


XII. 

THE  FROGS. 

(p-  f.  75-) 

Two  frogs  were  dwelling  each  to  other  near ; 
Now  one  abode  in  a deep  marshy  mere, 
Which  at  n 6 distance  from  the  highroad  lay ; 
One  in  a puddle  on  the  carriage-way. 


734 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


He  of  the  mere  the  other  recommends 
To  change  his  quarters,  come,  and  live  as  friends, 
And  thus  a safer  dwelling  to  obtain. 

The  other  said,  declining,  “ ’Twould  be  pain 
“ Too  great  for  him  accustom’d  haunts  to  quit/’ 
And  held  his  way,  .till,  passing  over  it 
A wagon  came ; by  which  the  frog  was  crushed. 
And  thus  on  fate,  by  not  complying,  rush’d. 


XIII. 

THE  VAGRANT  PRIESTS  OF  CYBELE. 

(P.  F.  290.) 

For  common  use  to  Rhea’s  vagrant  priests 
Was  sold  an  ass,  most  luckless  among  beasts, 

That  it  might  carry  for  these  begging  knaves 
Rites,  food,  whate’er  from  thirst  or  hunger  saves. 
These  roam’d,  as  is  their  wont,  the  country  through, 
And  craved  provisions,  asking,  “ Who  but  knew, 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


*35 


“ Among  the  swains,  how  Attis  fair  was  maim’d  ? 

“ To  Rhea’s  drum  who  would  not  be  ashamed 
“ To  fail  in  gifts  of  first-rate  pulse  and  bread  ?” 

At  length  the  ass,  o’erburden’d,  fell  down  dead, 

Poor  wretch,  and  said  good-bye  to  all  his  toil. 

Him  the  rogues  hasten’d  of  his  hide  to  spoil, 

And  stretch’d  it,  closely-fitted,  o’er  a drum  : 

On  other  roguish  priests  they  chanced  to  come, 

As  they  were  roaming  through  the  villages, 

Furnished  with  drums.  And  they  were  asked  by 
these, 

How  fared  their  ass.  “ It  died  long  time  ago,” 

They  answered,  “ yet  it  now  receives  a blow 
“ So  often,  that,  had  it  been  still  alive, 

“ ’Neath  these  it  could  by  no  means  long  survive.” 


136 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XIV. 

THE  HUSBANDMAN  AND  THE  EAGLE. 
(P.  F.  92.) 

A rustic  saw  an  eagle  in  the  snare, 

And,  as  he  much  admired  its  beauty  rare, 

He  loosed  it  from  its  fetters  forth  to  roam  : 
Thence  did  the  eagle  a warm  friend  become 
To  its  preserver.  For,  t’  avoid  the  heat 
And  catch  the  breeze,  it  saw  him  take  his  seat 
Beneath  a wall.  It  snatch’d,  as  o’er  it  flew, 

A burden  from  his  head,  and  this  it  threw 
Far  off.  The  rustic,  eager  to  pursue 
His  pack,  made  for  it.  Down  the  walling  fell : 
And  thus  the  rustic  was  requited  well. 

Kind  acts,  if  birds  in  grateful  memory  set, 

Can  any,  save  the  worst  of  men,  forget  1 


The  Fables  of  Babrius, 


i37 


XV. 

THE  HUSBANDMAN  AND  FORTUNE . 

(P.  F.  IOI.) 

Gold,  as  the  earth  he  dug,  a labourer  found, 

And  every  day  with  garlands  wreath’d  the  ground, 
Seeing  that  thence  he  reap’d  undoubted  good ; 

But  with  this  speech  dame  Fortune  o’er  him  stood  : 
“ Why  ever,  man,  dost  thou  my  gifts  mistake 
“ For  earth’s  ? ’Twas  I that  did  thy  riches  make, 

“ I,  by  whose  help  ;tis  said  that  some  are  blest, 

“ Who  chance  to  find  me  kinder  than  the  rest ; 

“ And  those  unblest,  to  whom  bad  luck  I bring. 

“ Now  I enrich  thee  thus,  as  purposing 
“ To  try  thy  judgment,  while  this  wealth  I send, 

“ Whether  thou  wilt  it  well  or  ill  expend. 

“ ’Twere  meet,  thou  shouldst  feel  gratitude  to  me ; 

“ For  if  thy  nature  changed  with  times  should  be, 

“ And  thou  unworthily  shouldst  squander  all, 

“ On  me,  and  not  on  earth,  the  blame  would  fall.” 


138 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


If  any  to  thee  do  an  office  kind, 

See  that  they  never  thee  unmindful  find. 

XVI. 

THE  WOMAN  AND  HER  MAIDSERVANTS . 

(P.  F.  110.) 

A very  careful  dame,  of  busy  way, 

Kept  maids  at  home,  and  these,  ere  break  of  day, 
She  used  to  rouse  as  early  as  cock-crow. 

They  thought  ’twas  hard  to  be  awaken’d  so, 

And  o’er  wool-spinning  be  at  work  so  long ; 

Hence  grew  within  them  all  a purpose  strong 
To  kill  the  house-cock,  whom  they  thought  to  blame 
For  all  their  wrongs.  But  no  advantage  came. 
Worse  treatment  than  the  former  them  befell  ; 

For  when  the  hour  their  mistress  could  not  tell 
At  which  by  night  the  cock  was  wont  to  crow, 

She  roused  them  earlier,  to  their  work  to  go. 

A harder  lot  the  wretched  maids  endured. 

Bad  judgment  oft  hath  such  results  procured. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


i39 


XVII. 

THE  WIZARD  WOMAN. 

(P.  F.  1 12.) 

A woman  boasted  the  divining  art, 

And  that,  when  Gods  make  the  wrongdoer  smart, 
Her  spells  could  bar  the  curse  of  ancient  sin. 
Large  fee  paid  those  who  would  her  secret  win. 
She  found  this  trade  all  arts  of  life  surpass'd ; 

So  when  the  witch  much  substance  had  amass’d, 
Some,  on  this  charge,  an  accusation  wrote, 

And  she  was  sentenced  by  a fateful  vote. 

One  saw  her  led  away  for  death,  and  cried  : 

“ What ! was  it  not  thy  promise  and  thy  pride, 

“ From  other  mortals  wrath  divine  to  turn  ? 

“ Thy  jurors’  votes  why  didst  thou  fail  to  earn 
“ By  thy  persuasion  i This  escaped  thy  plan, 

(“  Thinking  t’  upset  things  sacred,  and  to  man 
“ The  counsels  of  the  Gods-above  unseal, 

“ And  how  much  anger  they  toward  sinners  feel,) 
“To  avert  thy  dragging  o’er  the  fatal  way.” 


A just  atonement  lying  prophets  pay. 


140 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XVIII. 

THE  OLD  WOMAN  AND  THE  DOCTOR. 
(P.  F.  107.) 

Afflicted  with  disorder  in  the  eyes, 

An  ancient  dame  a famous  doctor  tries, 

In  hopes  that  he  her  malady  may  cure. 

Now  ’twas  agreed,  before  a witness  sure, 

That  if  that  woman’s  eyesight  he  should  save, 
An  ample  fee  the  oculist  should  have : 

But  if  the  healer  rid  not  of  disease 
His  patient,  he  should  forfeit  all  his  fees. 

As  then  with  oils  he  did  her  eyes  anoint, 

And  of  his  daily  visit  made  a point, 
Blindfolding  her  withal,  her  sight  to  shade, 

Free  with  his  patient’s  property  he  made. 

Thus  he  continued  every  day  to  do, 

And  when  he  by  degrees  her  goods  withdrew, 
And  all  her  stock  had  actually  ta’en, 

At  last  the  woman  did  her  sight  regain. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


141 

Of  course  the  healer  further  claim’d  his  fee. 

The  dame,  with  sight  recover’d,  fail’d  to  see 
Aught  of  her  chattels,  and  refused  to  pay 
A doctor,  who  with  these  had  made  away. 

The  healer  pressed  his  suit,  his  payment  sought ; 

She  put  him  olf,  and  would  not  pay  him  aught. 

Before  the  courts  he  therefore  brings  the  case, 

And  then  the  woman,  standing  face  to  face 
Before  the  jurors,  told  them  all  the  truth  : 

“ This  doctor,  gentlemen,  pretends,  in  sooth, 

“ He  heal’d  mine  eyes,  which  healing  balms  did  need; 
“ But  I maintain  that  blindness  sore  indeed 
“ I suffer  still ; for  with  mine  ailing  eyes 
“ I saw  goods,  chattels,  riches,  all  I prize, 

“ At  home.  But  now,  when  yon  rogue  says  I see, 

“ Not  one  of  these,  I say,  is  seen  by  me.” 

’Tis  thus,  to  love  of  gain  when  bad  men  yield, 

By  their  own  hands  their  doings  are  reveal’d. 


142 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


XIX. 

THE  DOGS  AND  THE  FOX. 

(P.  F.  219.  ) 

One  day  some  dogs  a lion’s  skin  had  found ; 

To  tear  it  hasten’d  each  audacious  hound  ; 

And  when  a fox  their  impudence  beheld, 

“ If  still,”  said  she,  “ his  place  the  lion  held 
“ Amid  the  living,  ye  should  find  his  claws 
“ Would,  oh ! how  much,  surpass  your  feebler  jaws.” 

To  lesser  men  who,  left  alone,  assail 
An  absent  better,  use  this  simple  tale  ! 


7 he  Fables  of  Babrius . 


XX. 

7 HE  DRAGON  AND  THE  EAGLE. 

(P.  F.  120.) 

A dragon  and  an  eagle  fiercely  met, 
Contending,  whLh  should  which  as  captive  get. 
The  dragon  got  the  eagle  ’neath  his  yoke, 

And  bound  him  fast,  so  as  almost  to  choke. 

A farmer  saw,  and  loosed  the  dragon-chain, 

And  bade  the  eagle  roam  at  large  again. 

At  this  the  dragon  deep  resentment  bore, 

And  in  the  farmer’s  cup  did  venom  pour. 

So  when  he  was  about  to  lift  it  up. 

Not  knowing  its  contents,  and  drain  the  cup, 
On  this  the  eagle  pounced  with  flapping  wings, 
And  from  the  farmer’s  grasp  the  vessel  flings. 
Thus  him  that  saved  him  did  the  eagle  save, 
Thus  to  his  champion  grateful  succour  gave. 


144 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


XXI. 

THE  BEES  AND  THE  SHEPHERD. 

(p.  F.  288.) 

Some  busy  bees,  beneath  an  old  oak’s  roots 
Were  making  wax  of  gather’d  flowers  and  fruits. 
A shepherd  saw  them  in  sweet  toil  partake, 

And  of  their  comb  a capture  fain  would  make. 
Round  him  they  buzz’d,  outvying  one  another 
T’  avert  the  theft,  the  thief  with  stings  to  smother. 
At  last  the  shepherd,  stung  and  smitten  sore, 
Exclaim’d,  “ I go  ! no  honey  want  I more, 

“ If  I must  needs  encounter  stings  of  bees !” 


Keep  from  another’s  goods,  and  dwell  at  ease. 


The  Fables  of  Babrins. 


145 


. XXII. 

THE  SHIPWRECK'D  MAN  AND  THE  SEA . 

(p.  F.  94.) 

A shipwreck’d  man,  by  ocean  cast  ashore, 

Slept  when  his  weary  toil  at  last  was  o’er ; 

But,  in  a while,  up-rising  out  of  sleep, 

He  blamed  with  many  a charge  the  treach’rous  deep  ; 
Saying,  that  she  had  sailors  oft  beguiled, 

Wearing  for  these  a surface  calm  and  mild, 

And  a fair  face,  betokening  placid  seas, 

And  yet  o’erwhelm’d  them,  if  they  tried  the  breeze. 
But  she  to  him  in  words  like  these  replied  : 

“ Sailor,  who  crossest  oft  the  ocean-tide, 

The  winds,  not  me,  I pray  thee,  learn  to  blame ; 

“ For  my  calm  nature  ever  is  the  same, 

“ As  thou  beholdest  even  at  this  hour ; 

“ But  when,  unlook’d  for,  boist’rous  tempests  lour, 

“ With  anger’d  waves  my  depths  they  agitate.” 

Let  blame  on  causes,  not  their  agents,  wait. 


L 


146 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XXIII. 

THE  FOX  AND  THE  MONKEY. 

(p.  F.  44.) 

A deep-toned  ass,  with  over-weening  bray, 
Proclaim’d  to  every  beast  a congress-day. 

The  meeting’s  object  was  a king  to  name, 

From  whose  wise  rule  the  brutes  might  justice  claim. 
An  ape  amongst  them  danced  to  music’s  sound, 

And  hence  as  king  of  beasts  was  named,  and  crowned. 
The  envious  fox  was  bent  to  play  the  cheat  : 

Fixt  in  some  nets  she  saw  a piece  of  meat, 

And  led  the  monkey  to  the  guilesome  snare, 

Saying,  “ I’ve  found  a treasure  vast  and  rare, 

“ A prize,  by  human  custom,  due  to  kings.” 

Into  the  nets  the  monkey  thus  she  brings. 

Said  Reynard,  mocking,  “ Being  such  a fool, 

“ Dost  think,  good  ape,  among  the  beasts  to  rule  ? 

Fare  as  befits  thee,  and  not  ill  thou’lt  fare ; 

But  over-strength  will  heavier  damage  share. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


!47 


XXIV. 

JUPITER,  PROMETHEUS,  PALLAS,  AND  MOMUS. 
[Compare  Part  I.  LIX.  P.  F.  155.] 

Prometheus,  Jove,  and  the  Tritonian  maid, 

That  each  would  make  one  thing,  agreed  and  said. 
Jove  made  a bull;  Prometheus  fashion'd  men  ; 

Pallas  a dwelling.  Envious  Momus  then 

Was  critic.  He,  of  hatred  ever  full 

To  works  divine,  said,  “ Jove  had  spoil’d  the  bull ; 

“ Whereas  o’er  horns  he  should  have  placed  the  eyes, 
“ Eye  below  horn  in  Jove's  construction  lies.” 
Prometheus  was  to  blame  : he  fail’d  to  place 
Man’s  mind  outside,  “ that  none  in  actions  base 
“ Might  lack  detection,  each  might  plainly  read 
<(  Of  what  each  sev’ral  man  stood  most  in  need.” 

Nor  did  the  work  of  Pallas  pass  unblamed ; 

“ Unfixt,  of  right,  should  be  the  house  she  framed, 

“ With  wheels  beneath,  that  if  an  evil  one 
“ Should  sojourn  near,  with  ease  it  might  begone.” 


i48 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


Justly  was  Jove  with  Momus  wroth,  I wot, 
Who  the  gods’  gifts  to  censure  scrupled  not. 

My  son,  this  fable’s  teaching  is  not  small ; 
Into  oblivion  do  not  let  it  fall. 

For  ever  toward  mankind  the  gods  are  good ; 
Yet,  not  e’en  these  escape  maligners  rude ; 
And  if,  in  fact,  gods  could  not  Momus  flee, 
What  must  not  men  endure  from  such  as  he  ? 


XXV. 

. THE  TRUMPETER. 

(P.  F#  386.) 

A herald  to  the  fight  the  host  did  stir  : 

No  warrior  he,  but  a good  trumpeter. 

Now  he,  when  taken,  to  his  captors  spake, 

“ My  life,  for  I am  guiltless,  do  not  take ; 

“ For  never  man  in  the  wild  battle-plain 
“Have  I,  nor  e’en  my  faithful  trumpet,  slain. 
“ No  metal  beside  this  do  I possess.” 

This  was  to  him  their  answer  pitiless : 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


149 


“ Why,  ’tis  for  this  thou  art  about  to  die, 

“ More  than  all  else.  Thou  giv’st  the  battle-cry 
“ To  others,  though  no  fighter.” 

That  man  kills, 

Who  any  work,  through  which  we  die,  fulfils. 


XXVI. 

HERCULES  AND  DALLAS. 

(p.  f.  159.) 

Along  a narrow  lane  went  Hercules ; 

And  something  sheep-like  on  the  ground  he  sees, 
Which  with  his  club  t;  exterminate  he  tries ; 

But  it,  once  struck,  began  to  grow  in  size. 

Seeing  it  to  such  bulk  so  quickly  swell, 

To  heavier  blows  with  all  his  might  he  fell. 

To  wondrous  bulk  again  the  monster  rose, 

And  block’d  the  way,  all  passage  to  oppose. 
Hercules  marvell’d  how  the  thing  would  end, 

Cast  down  his  club,  and  halted.  Where  to  wend 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


150 

He  knew  not.  Lo  ! Athena  met  his  sight. 

“ Spare  toil,”  quoth  she,  “ and,  hero,  learn  aright, 
“ Strife  is  the  strange  appearance  which  you  see. 
“ Let  it  but,  as  before,  unhinder’d  be, 

“ And  unincreas’d  ’twill  bide.  In  contest  thus 
“ Swoll’n,  as  you  see,  it  masters  all  of  us.” 


XXVII. 

HERCULES  AND  PLUTUS. 

(p.  F.  t6o.) 

Bidden  to  feast  at  each  immortal’s  side, 

The  hero  once  with  men,  now  deified, 

Sweet  converse  with  each  God  held  Hercules, 
Till  he  had  come  to  Plutus,  last  of  these. 

To  speak  to  him  the  hero’s  soul  disdain’d, 

Nor  converse  with  him,  like  the  rest,  maintain’d. 
Jove  in  amazement  for  an  answer  press’d, 

Why  he  had  ev’ry  other  God  address’d, 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


151 

But  not  one  syllable  to  Plutus  said. 

Then  Hercules  to  Jove  this  answer  made  : 

<(  Why,  because  him,  abhorr’d  on  earth  by  me, 

Kt  I never  saw  but  in  rogues’  company.” 


XXVIII. 

THE  APPLE-TREE,  POMEGRANATE , AND 
BRAMBLE . 

(P.  f.  385.) 

For  beauty’s  prize  once  strove  the  apple-tree 
With  the  pomegranate.  Each  strove  angrily. 

The  thorn-inflicting  bramble,  dwelling  nigh, 

Heard  all  the  strife,  and  utter’d  language  high 
To  both.  “ Let  us  from  rivalry  desist 
“ For  beauty’s  prize,  my  friends.” 

Bid  that  man  list 

This  fable,  who  himself,  tho’  vastly  less, 

Would  thrust  mid  nobler  men,  through  foolishness. 


i52 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XXIX. 

THE  TRAVELLERS  AND  THE  CROW. 

(p.  f.  312.) 

As  men  to  work  did  from  a village  go. 

Upon  their  path  came  suddenly  a crow, 

Flying  above,  and  blind  in  his  left  eye  : 

And  one  man  said  that  this  was  reason  why 
They  should  turn  back  : the  omen  did  not  bode 
Good  luck  to  them,  if  they  pursued  their  road. 

Not  without  wit  the  other  answer'd  thus : 

“ How  could  that  bird  tell  aught  of  fate  to  us, 

“ Which  not  her  own  bereavement  had  foreknown, 

“ Or  round  her  eyes  a guard  she  would  have  thrown." 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


153 


XXX. 

THE  KITE  AND  THE  SNAKE. 

(p.  F.  207. ) 

Bearing  aloft  a snake  the  kite  up-flew, 

Whom  with  a bite  its  captive  turning  slew, 
And  thus  addrest  him,  as  he  breath’d  his  last  : 
“ Into  such  phrensy  wherefore  wast  thou  cast, 
“ As  to  have  injured  me,  who  hurt  thee  not  ? 

“ What  thou  for  me  designedst,  is  thy  lot.” 


XXXI. 

LIES  AND  TRUTH 

A haughty  troop  unto  a village  hies, 

A muster  strong  of  over-ruling  Lies. 

Of  broider’d  purple  were  the  robes  they  wore ; 
Each  of  their  steeds  its  golden  cheek-piece  bore. 


*54 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


Behind,  a throng  audacious  follow’d  quick, 

Deceit  and  Guile,  and  every  knavish  Trick. 

And  lo  ! they  met  a maiden  on  their  road, 

Her  dress  and  fashion  of  a simple  mode, 

Nay,  somewhat  poor.  Yet  stately  was  her  mien, 
And  long  unfed,  poor  sufferer,  had  she  been. 

Her  did  these  Lies  accost,  and  sought  to  know 
Whither,  and  on  what  errand  she  would  go. 

She  answer’d,  “ Pardon,  sirs,  if  no  reply 
“ Comes  from  a throat  with  thirst  and  hunger  dry.” 
So  then  the  Lies  thus  answer’d  her  again  : — 

“ To  yon  near  village  follow  in  our  train  ; 

“ ’Tis  but  a small  one,  yet  ’tis  well  supplied  : 

“ Well-victuall’d  hostels  will  good  cheer  provide  ; 

“ Come  as  our  guest,  and  you  shall  eat  your  fill.” 
She  followed  them,  deject,  and  downcast  still, 

Into  the  inn  : but  ne’er  a word  she  said. 

Mine  host  on  their  arrival  quickly  spread 
For  them  a table  fill’d  with  various  meats, 

Whence  each  one,  as  he  lists,  his  fancy  treats. 

This  done,  they  bridled  steeds,  and  cried  to  “ horse 
When  for  his  reckoning  asks  the  host,  of  course. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


155 


On  this  the  Lies  were  wroth  at  his  demand, 

Which  they  nor  paid,  nor  yet  would  understand. 

The  brood  of  impudence  in  vain  he  sues  : 

They  answer  straight,  “ That  he  has  had  his  dues, 

“ That  they  have  paid,  like  gentlemen,  the  cost.” 

To  press  each  for  his  share  was  labour  lost : 

And  much  less  could  he  force  the  banded  throng : 
Against  a troop  was  ever  one  man  strong  ? 

Upon  the  door-step  stay’d  the  fellow-guest, 

Without  a word,  but  still  with  look  deprest. 

The  landlord  now  despair’d  to  see  his  own  : 

And  “Truth,  where  art  thou?”  cried  in  heighten’d  tone. 
She  answer’d  : “ Here,  good  sir,  but  what  to  do 
“ I knew  not : till  I met  yon  reckless  crew, 

“ My  want  of  food  was  wholly  unsupplied  ; 

“ Ay,  and  without  them,  I had  long  since  died.” 


156 


The  Fables  of  Babrius, 


XXXII. 

THE  LION  AND  THE  GOAT 
(p.  f.  253.) 

A lion  met  a goat,  beside  a spring, 

In  summer  thirst  to  all  brings  suffering, 

To  beasts,  and  soil,  and  plants,  no  less  than  man. 
For  the  first  sip  a quarrel  then  began. 

Dire  was  the  strife,  and  would  have  led  to  death, 
But  that  they  parted,  to  recover  breath 
For  further  conflict,  just  a little  space, 

Looking  each  other  fiercely  in  the  face  : 

And  gathering  vultures  suddenly  they  spied, 
Which,  from  aloft,  their  wrathful  struggle  eyed, 

In  expectation  of  a well-timed  treat, 

Since  he  that  fell  would  furnish  dainty  meat. 
Now,  as  on  these  the  weary  champions  gaze, 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


157 


“ Come,  cease  we  fighting,”  each  to  other  says ; 

“ Better  be  friends,  than  yield  the  vultures  food  ! ” " 

> 

By  thee,  my  son,  too,  be  dire  strife  eschew’d, 

For  homes  and  cities  it  hath  ever  strew’d. 

XXXIII. 

THE  CROW  AND  THE  SWAN. 

(P.  F.  20 6.) 

A crow  the  swans  their  fair  complexion  grudged  : 

He  would  have  been  quite  as  white-skinn’d,  he 
judged, 

Did  he  but  float  on  river,  or  on  lake  : 

He  left  the  hearths,  where  he  was  wont  to  take 
His  food,  and  to  the  swans’  dank  dwelling  went. 

To  him  no  change  of  hue  ablution  lent, 

But  famine  kill’d  him,  when  no  food  he  got. 

Nature  a change  of  dwelling  alters  not. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius , 


158 


XXXIV. 

THE  DOG  AND  THE  COCKLE, 

(p.  f.  223.) 

To  swallow  eggs  was  a dog’s  wonted  fun  : 
Seeing  a cockle,  this  he  took  for  one, 

And  gorged  it  with  a gulp  immediately : 

Then  sorely  griped  in  bowels  by  and  by, 

“ A just  reward,”  quoth  he,  “my  sin  hath  found, 
“ Because  for  eggs  I took  whate’er  was  round.” 

Choose  thou  the  real,  not  what  fair  may  sound. 


XXXV. 

THE  BULL,  THE  LIONESS,  AND  THE  WILD  BOAR, 
(p-  F-  395-) 

A bull  a lion  wrapt  in  slumber  caught, 

Whose  death  by  goring  with  his  horns  he  wrought ; 
His  dam  came  up,  and  o’er  her  cub  made  wail : 

A wild  boar  overheard  her  piteous  tale. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


159 


Standing  afar, — “ How  many  more/’  quoth  he, 

“ Of  mothers  weep  for  offspring  bitterly, 

“ Which  having  slaughter’d,  ye  your  banquet  keep.” 

Know  that  ill-doers  their  deserts  shall  reap. 


XXXVI. 

THE  GNA  T AND  THE  LION 
(p.  f.  234.) 

A boasting  gnat  drew  to  a lion  near : 

And  said  : “No  greater  strength  for  me  to  fear 
“ Hast  thou  ! What  is  thy  force  % — with  claws  to 
scratch, 

“ With  teeth  to  bite  ? — this  might  a woman  match  : 

“ Nay,  oft  she  does,  when  striving  with  her  mate 
“ For  no  great  ends.  My  strength  is  far  more  great. 

“ But  come  ! let  us  the  strength  of  each  compare  ! ” 

It  buzz’d,  and  fixed  on  parts  devoid  of  hair, 

And  the  poor  lion’s  face  and  nostrils  stung. 

That  lion’s  claws  to  his  own  visage  clung, 


i6o 


The  Tables  of  Babrius . 


Reeking  with  blood.  He  yielded  in  despair. 

Then  the  gnat’s  trumpet  sounded  triumph  rare. 

It  flew  aloft,  in  lion-victor’s  pride, 

Till,  captured  in  a spider’s  web,  it  cried, 

“ Alas  my  wretched  fate,  since  e’en  tho’  I 
“ The  greatest  conquer,  by  the  small  I die  ! ” 

Weakness  ’gainst  strength  may  something  seem  to  do, 
Yet  pays  the  cost  to  foes  it  never  knew. 


XXXVII. 

THE  SWALLOW  AND  THE  CROW. 

'P.  F.  416.) 

A twittering  swallow  hail’d  a husky  crow. 

“ Me  for  a royal  maid  of  Athens  know  ! 

“ And  as  a daughter  of  her  kings  of  yore  : 

“ Not  small  renown  our  house  of  heroes  bore.” 
To  this  vague  prattle  (love  of  talk  was  strong  :) 
She  adds  the  tale  of  Tereus,  and  his  wrong. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


161 


These  words  to  her  the  crow  in  answer  said  : 

“ Pandion’s  boastful  child,  Athenian  maid  ! 

“ Had  you  a tongue,  to  what  lengths  would  you  go, 
“ Since,  when  it  is  cut  off,  you  twitter  so  ! ” 


XXXVIII. 

THE  GULL  AND  THE  KITE. 

(p.  f.  239.) 

A gull  once  gorged  a fish,  fell  down,  and  died, 
Because  its  throat  to  pass  the  spoil  denied. 

A kite  looked  on,  and  said  : “ Just  fate  ensues, 

“ Since,  though  a fowl,  a fishy  food  you  choose  ” 

Aim  your  own  station,  and  no  more,  to  fill. 
Work  nature’s  hests,  and  you  escape  from  ill. 


M 


j62 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XXXIX. 

THE  HORSE  AND  THE  STAG . 

(P.  F.  175.  ARISTOT.  RHET.  II.  20.) 

At  summer  season,  o’er  a flowery  mead 
A well  maned  horse  was  wont  at  large  to  feed  ; 
And  ill  brook’d  he  that  any  other  beast 
Should  graze  the  herbage,  where  he  loved  to  feast. 
For  his  sole  use  he  deemed  the  meads  unfold 
Their  verdure.  But  a stag,  not  over  bold, 

Came  oft,  and  nibbled  at  the  grassy  plain ; 

So  how  to  punish  her  he  wrack’d  his  brain. 

Seeing  a man,  he  ask’d  his  sage  advice, 

Who  said  that  he  would  help  him  in  a trice 
To  take  upon  the  stag  a vengeance  just, 

If  to  the  bridle  he  his  mouth  would  trust, 

And  on  his  saddled  back  the  man  might  ride. 

The  horse — a slave  since  then  till  now — complied. 

Observe,  I pray,  the  grievous  curse  entail’d, 

Where  selfishness  has  over  sense  prevail’d. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


163 


XL. 

THE  LION ; THE  WOLF,  AND  THE  FOX. 

(P.  F.  255.) 

A lion  sick  within  his  cave  reclined  ; 

Then  came  each  beast  of  all  the  savage  kind 
To  visit  and  enquire  for  their  king. 

Beyond  the  rest  the  fox  kept  loitering. 

Now,  the  wolf  fixt  on  this  auspicious  time 
Slily  to  charge  the  fox  with  treason’s  crime, 

“ Since  she  alone  with  negligence  did  treat 
“ The  king  of  brutes,  to  which  the  earth  is  meat, 

“ When  she  to  ease  his  sufferings  should  be  near, 

“ As  wise  in  counsel,  and  in  judgment  clear  — 

Up  came  the  fox,  as  the  wolf  closed  his  speech, 

And  his  last  words  chanc’d  Reynard’s  ears  to  reach. 
The  lion  shook  his  mane  in  angry  mood, 

To  see  the  fox  into  his  cave  intrude; 

But  the  sagacious  fox  was  nowise  cowed, 

And  only  pray’d  for  right  of  speech  allowed. 

’Twas  granted.  Then  said  she  (the  wolf  stood  near): 


M 2 


164 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


“ Now  who,  my  liege,  of  beasts  assembled  here, 

“ Hath  render’d  thee  such  loyal  aid  as  I % 

“ I have  the  country  traversed  low  and  high, 

“ And  question’d  every  leech  concerning  thee, 

“ In  hopes  some  one  might  point  a remedy ; 

“ Aye  and  I’ve  found,  nor  vainly  sought,  the  way  : 
“ Physicians  learned  by  experience  say, 

“ That  hence  the  patient  certain  ease  shall  win, 

“ If  from  a living  wolf  he  strip  the  skin, 

“ And  this,  yet  warm,  around  his  body  wrap.” 

He  said.  Forthwith  the  wolf,  that  plann’d  a trap, 
Lay  dead  ; and  thus  the  debt  of  malice  paid. 

“ O wolf,  ill-fated  ! ” Reynard  laughing  said, 

“ ’Twas  better  that  thou  shouldst  not  counsel  ill 
“ The  lion,  but  guide  right  his  kindly  will : 

“ For  whoso  against  others  brings  about 
“ Evil,  the  same  shall  turn  and  find  him  out.” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XLI. 

THE  LION,  PROMETHEUS,  AND  THE  ELEPHANT 
(P.  F.  261.) 

The  lion  urged  it  as  a constant  charge 
Against  Prometheus,  that  while  fine  and  large 
He  made  him,  and  with  teeth  had  arm’d  his  jaw, 
Fencing  withal  each  foot  with  horny  claw, 

And  rank’d  him  first  of  brutes  for  valour’s  praise, 

“ Such  though  I am,  the  cock  my  soul  dismays,” 
Quoth  he.  Prometheus  made  him  this  reply : 

‘‘  Pray,  why  on  me  should  idle  censure  lie  ? 

“ All  I could  give  thou  hast,  as  it  was  fit ; 

“ But  if  at  times  thy  spirit  quails  a whit, 

“ No  marvel ! In  nought  else  thou  fallest  short.” 

So  when  Prometheus  gave  him  this  retort, 

The  lion  bitterly  his  fate  bemoan’d, 

And  his  own  cowardice,  condemning,  own’d. 

He  cared  no  more  to  live  in  such  disgrace, 

But,  in  this  mind,  encounter’d  face  to  face 


1 66 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


An  elephant,  with  which  to  talk  he  stay'd. 

Seeing  its  ears  were  hither  thither  sway’d, 

He  asked,  “ Why  thus  in  motion  keep  your  ears  ? 

“ What  beast,  good  sir,  so  dread  to  you  appears, 

“ As  thus  your  hearing-organs  to  confound  ?” 

It  chanced  a gnat  buzz’d  presently  around  : 

“ Seest  thou  yon  buzzing  mite  ? ” the  huge  beast  said, 
“ Let  it  once  pierce  mine  ear,  and  I am  dead.” 

The  lion,  hearing  this,  took  heart  to  cry, 

“ Why  should  I any  more  desire  to  die,  r 

“ Since  better  far  than  elephants  am  I ? 

“ And  as  much  better  in  my  lot  have  fared, 

“ As  cock  beats  gnat,  when  both  have  been  compared.” 

None  are  unblest,  save  by  comparison  : 

This  is  a wise  saw,  and  an  ancient  one. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


167 


XLII. 

THE  PEACOCK  AND  THE  CRANE. 

(P.  F.  397.  Compare  Part  I.  LXV.) 

The  fine-helm’ d peacock  and  the  Libyan  crane 
Were  wont  to  pasture  on  one  grassy  plain. 

Long  time  in  mutual  amity  they  passed, 

But  dire  contention  made  them  foes  at  last, 

And  golden  plumage  strove  with  ashen  hue, 

To  which  a good  complexion’s  meed  was  due. 
Jibes  at  the  crane  the  grinning  peacock  throws, 
And  mocks  its  colour  with  uplifted  nose  ; 

Claiming  his  own  “ to  be  the  perfect  wing 
“ Of  gold  and  purple,  worthy  of  a king.” 

To  whom  the  crane  a fitting  answer  made  : 

“ And  yet  ’tis  I who  cloud-capp’d  heights  pervade  ; 
“ Nighest  the  shining  stars  my  notes  are  heard, 

“ While  you  are  but  a weak  and  slow-paced  bird, 

“ That  skim  the  ground,  nor  ever  upward  go ; 

“ But,  like  a bantam-cock,  mid  chickens  crow.” 


1 68 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


Fame,  tho’  I threadbare  went,  Fd  covet  most : 
Riches,  with  name  unknown,  on  me  were  lost. 


XLIII. 

THE  WOLF  AND  THE  ASS. 

(P.  F.  281.) 

A wolf,  whom  fellow  wolves  to  lead  them  chose, 
Would  fain  to  all  an  equal  law  propose, 

That  whatsoe’er  each  took  in  foraging, 

To  share  amongst  his  fellows  he  should  bring. 

An  ass  heard  this,  and  bristling  up  his  mane, 

To  the  fair  dealer  spoke  in  laughing  strain  : 

“ Well  have  you  said,  intending  laws  to  frame 
“To  govern  wolves.  But  tell  me  how  you  came 
“ In  a sly  corner  of  your  lair  to  lay 
“ Apart  the  feast,  which  you  stole  yesterday  ? ” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


169 


XLIV. 

THE  WOLF  AND  THE  LION . 

(P.  F.  280.) 

In  desert  spots  a wolf  had  chanced  to  roam, 

And,  when  the  day-star  near’d  its  western  home, 
Seeing  his  shadow  long  and  tall  appear, 

Said,  “ Being  larger,  need  I lions  fear  ? 

“ Sure,  to  a hundred  feet  in  measure  grown, 

“ I shall  be  lord  of  all,  not  brutes  alone  !” 

Upon  th’  exulting  wolf  a lion  sprung, 

And  seized  and  ate  him.  The  confession  wrung 
From  his  last  utterance  was,  “My  cause  of  doom 
“ Is,  that  on  self-opinion  I presume.” 


170 


The  Fables  oj  Babrius. 


XLV. 

THE  WOLF  AND  THE  SHEEP, 

(P.  F.  285.) 

Bitten  by  dogs,  a wolf  lay  sick  and  sore, 

And  of  a passing  sheep  began  to  implore 
Relief  for  thirst.  A spring  of  water  flow'd 
Hard  by.  Then  said  he,  “ Were  there  but  bestow’d 
“ By  thee  a draught  of  this,  my  thirst  to  slake, 

“To  furnish  mine  own  meat  I’d  undertake.” 

“ I give  thee  drink  ! then  I should  be  thy  meat ! ” 
The  sheep  replied. 


Fly  foes  that  use  deceit. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XLVI. 

THE  JACKDAW  AND  THE  CROWS. 

(P.  F.  201.) 

A daw  in  size  his  fellows  much  surpass’d, 

So  on  his  tribe  a scornful  glance  he  cast, 

And  chose  to  be  a tribesman  of  the  crows. 

He  therefore  sought  their  presence,  to  propose 
Dwelling  with  them,  and  clubbing  for  his  food. 
His  form  they  neither  knew,  nor  understood 
His  accents,  with  his  race  in  unison  ; 

So,  beating  him,  they  made  him  quick  begone. 
Driven  from  these,  he  sought  his  own  again ; 
But  they,  at  his  desertion  in  disdain — 

Because  they  thought  his  conduct  insolent — 

To  take  him  back  by  no  means  would  consent. 
An  outlaw’d,  homeless  daw  was  he  from  thence. 

None  will  attain  with  strangers  influence. 


172 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XLVII, 

THE  FLIES. 

(p.  F.  293.) 

On  honey  in  a storeroom  spilt,  some  flies 
Began  to  feast  in  gathering  companies. 

The  sweet  repast  their  lingering  wills  detain’d, 
And  as  their  feet  were  by  its  pow’r  constrain’d, 
Upon  the  wing  no  longer  could  they  rise  ; 
Then,  as  they  choke,  each  one  to  other  cries, 

“ Alas  ! poor  creatures,  down  our  lives  we  lay, 
“ Most  sadly  by  brief  pleasure  led  astray.” 


XLVIII. 

THE  MOON  AND  ITS  MOTHER. 

(p.  f.  389.) 

The  moon  her  lady  mother  once  besought, 
That  a close-fitting  tunic  might  be  wrought 
For  her.  To  whom  her  mother,  smiling,  said, 
“ How  shall  a dress  be  wrought  or  measured 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


T73 


“ For  thy  uncertain  figure  i over-great 
“ Now,  near  the  full ; and  then  in  bursting  state  ; 

“ Gibbous  and  crescent-shaped  thou  wilt  be  soon. 

“ All  through  the  month  come  changes  of  the  moon.” 

XLIX. 

THE  MOUSE  AND  THE  FROG. 

(p.  F.  298.) 

A field-mouse  to  a frog,  by  evil  lot, 

Became  a friend,  and  hence  destruction  got ; 

For  with  the  field-mouse  first  they  came  to  eat, 

And  then  resorted  to  the  frog's  retreat. 

But  evil  soon  became  the  frog's  design. 

He  tied  his  friend’s  foot  to  him  with  a line, 

And  dragg’d  him  to  the  margin  of  a lake, 

A bath  within  its  marshy  depths  to  take  : 

Drown’d  by  the  waters  thus,  the  mouse  was  choked, 
And  perish'd,  to  a frog  by  being  yoked. 

Its  corpse  then  as  the  eddying  surface  bore, 

A hawk  with  eager  talons  upward  tore, 


174 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


With  it  was  dragg’d  the  frog,  to  which  ’twas  tied : 
Doom’d  for  the  hawk  two  banquets  to  provide, 
He  learn’ d what  wages  want  of  thought  betide. 


L. 

THE  SPENDTHRIFT  AND  THE  SWALLOW, 
(p.  f.  304.) 

To  a young  spendthrift  but  one  garb  was  left, 

Of  all  but  this  by  reckless  waste  bereft. 

He  saw  a swallow,  out  of  season,  fly 

Near  him,  and  heard  its  little  twittering  cry. 

Thinking  at  once  that  the  spring-tide  was  near, 

Of  parting  with  his  coat  he  had  no  fear  ; 

And  so  he  took  and  sold  it,  like  the  rest : 

But  soon,  when  winter  storms  about  her  prest, 
And  suddenly  the  strong  wind  round  her  roll’d, 
Alas ! the  wretched  swallow  died  of  cold. 

Her  for  a while  the  young  man  looked  upon, 

And  said,  “ Poor  bird,  much  evil  hast  thou  done  ! 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


*75 


“ Appearing  ere  the  spring-tide,  thou  hast  wrought  " 
“ Ruin  to  me,  and  to  thyself,  for  nought.” 

Evil  is  wastefulness  and  want-of-thought. 


LI. 

See  Part  I.  128. 


LII. 

See  Part  I.  124. 


LIII. 

THE  SHEEP  AND  THE  DOG. 

(P.  F.  317.  Compare  Fragment  1,  Part  I.) 

A sheep  one  day  address’d  its  shepherd  thus  : 

“ You  shear  our  fleece,  and  keep  it,  shorn,  from  us ; 
“ You  drain  our  milk,  and  press  it,  if  you  choose  : 

“ Our  young  to  swell  your  flock  we  ne’er  refuse. 


i7  6 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


“ For  us  nought  else  you  do,  but  simply  lead 
“To  pasture.  All  the  grass,  on  which  we  feed, 

“ Is  found  for  you  by  kind,  all-nursing  earth. 

“ E’en  on  the  hills  a fruitful  soil  gives  birth 
“ For  you,  without  your  help,  to  verdure  new, 

“ Beneath  moist  air,  and  soft  descending  dew. 

“ Yet  while  such  profit  from  us  you  derive, 

“ Still  you  would  have  your  dog  among  us  thrive, 

“ Feeding  it,  as  yourself,  on  best  of  food.” 

The  dog  was  near  and  heard.  These  words  ensued 
“ O,  thou  that  bleatest  foolish-minded  talk, 

“ Were  it  not  that  I oft  amidst  you  walk, 

“ Abundant  herbage  you  no  more  would  eat, 

“ But  be  to  brutes,  that  roam  the  hills,  a treat. 

“ Now  running  all  around  you,  timid  sheep 
“ From  busy  thief,  and  ravening  wolf  I keep.” 

To  thankless  men  this  fable  is  addrest, 

Who  benefactors  with  ill-names  molest. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


I77 


LIV. 

See  Part  I.  125. 


LV. 

THE  ASS  AND  THE  FOX . 

(P-  F.  325.) 

An  ass  was  fond  of  eating  prickly  food, 

And  grinning  Reynard  ask’d,  when  this  she  view’d, 

“ With  tongue  so  soft,  how  is  it,  best  of  brutes, 

“ That  on  hard  food  you  live,  and  thorny  fruits  ? 

“ How  can  your  tongue  from  prickly  wounds  escape  ? ” 

To  babblers  well  this  fable  thou  may’st  shape. 


N 


i78 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


LVI. 

THE  ASS  WEARING  THE  LIONS  SKIN 
(p-  f*  333-) 

In  lion’s  skin  an  ass  once  went  about, 

And  threw  the  brute  creation  into  rout ; 

They  thought  him  a true  lion,  not  an  ass  : 

He  therefore  tried,  when  Reynard  chanced  to  pass, 
If,  like  the  rest,  a fox  would  yield  to  fright. 

But  when  he  met  that  wily  creature’s  sight 

(Now  she,  by  chance,  that  moment  heard  him  bray), 

Quoth  she  to  him,  “ Be  sure  of  what  I say, 

“ Had  I not  just  now  mark’d  you  when  you  bray’d, 
“ I,  like  my  fellow-brutes,  had  been  afraid.” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


179 


LVIL 

AN  ASS  CARRYING  AN  IMAGE. 

(P-  F.  3^4*)  . 

A countryman  had  placed  upon  his  ass 
An  image ; and,  in  driving,  made  him  pass 
Right  through  a village.  All  men  homage  paid 
Unto  the  idol.  Then  the  ass  betray’d 
Elation,  thought  himself  a god,  and  felt 
That  ’twas  to  his  divinity  they  knelt. 

Pricking  his  ears,  with  an  astounding  bray, 

He  presently  declined  the  onward  way  ; 

At  seeing  which  his  driver  angry  grew, 

And  with  a stick  compelled  him  to  pursue 
His  journey.  “ Thou  art  but  an  ass,”  said  he, 

“ Though  on  thy  back  there  rides  divinity.” 


N 2 


i8o 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


LVIII. 

THE  BIRD-CATCHER  AND  THE  LARK. 
(p.  f.  340.) 

A bird-catcher,  while  he  his  springes  set, 

Was  by  a lark,  that  saw  him,  quickly  met. 

“ What  dost  thou  here,  so  busy  on  the  ground  % ” 
Quoth  he,  “ A first-rate  city  this,  I found  ! ” 

He  went  and  hid  himself  when  this  was  said. 
Straight  came  the  lark,  by  his  false  words  misled, 
In  haste  at  once  to  plant  its  colony  : 

And  in  the  toils  was  caught  unwittingly. 

Up  ran  the  bird-catcher  to  seize  his  prey; 

Then  did  the  captive  to  its  captor  say, 

“ If  cities  such  as  these,  good  sir,  you  plant, 

“ The  list  of  dwellers  in  them  will  be  scant.” 

Cities  and  homes  are  most  made  desolate, 

When  evil  heads  have  care  of  their  estate. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


181 


LIX. 

THE  TAIL  AND  MEMBERS  OF  A SERPENT 
(P*  F.  344.) 

A serpent’s  tail  once  claim’d  the  lead  to  take, 

And  drag  the  other  members  in  its  wake. 

Then  did  the  body  it,  as  mad,  oppose  : 

“ How  wilt  thou  lead  us  without  eyes  or  nose  % 

“ Unlike  the  rest  of  beasts,  that  roam  a-field.” 

In  vain.  The  thinking  limbs  were  forced  to  yield. 
So  the  tail  led  the  rest  with  senseless  sway, 

And  blindly  dragg’d  the  body  every  way. 

It  fell  at  last  into  a cleft  of  rock, 

Whence  back,  head,  body,  met  a fearful  shock. 
Then  fawningly  it  did  the  head  beseech  : 

“ Save,  mistress,  save  me,  pray,  from  danger’s  reach, 
“ For  of  bad  judgment  now  I reap  the  fruit.” 

This  fable  to  a commons  best  will  suit 
Which,  frensied  and  perverted,  fain  would  rise 
And  hold  dominion  over  men  more  wise. 


102 


The  Fables  of  Bab rins. 


LX. 

THE  FARMER  AND  THE  SERPENT 
(P.  F.  96.) 

A snake,  that  by  a farmer’s  door  did  hide, 
Stung  his  child’s  foot,  and  so  the  infant  died. 
Great  was  the  sorrow  which  the  parents  bore. 
And  the  sire,  smitten  by  a blow  so  sore, 

Taking  a stone,  approach’d  the  serpent’s  den, 
Waiting  to  kill  it  coming  forth  again. 

Out  from  its  hole  it  came  to  hunt  for  prey  : 

Up  ran  in  eager  haste  the  sire  straightway, 

And  at  it  with  main  force  he  cast  a stone, 
Which  lack’d  success,  to  little  purpose  thrown  ; 
His  aim  to  hurt  the  murderous  snake  did  fail, 
Further  than,  at  its  end,  to  bruise  its  tail. 

Then  fearful  lest  the  reptile  him  should  slay, 
And  thus  the  fracture  of  that  tail  repay, 

Honey  and  meal  and  water  he  procured, 

And  thus  his  foe  to  be  at  peace  adjured. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


i 


But  then  the  monster,  hissing  from  its  hole 
(To  which,  when  wounded,  it  for  shelter  stole), 
Some  such  defiance  at  the  father  threw : 

“Till you  the  tomb,  the  stone  / cease  to  view, 

“ There  never  can  be  peace  betwixt  us  two.” 


LXI. 

THE  BOY  HUNTING  LOCUSTS. 

(P-  F.  350.) 

To  gather  locusts  forth  a lad  had  gone, 

He  caught  a host,  ere  he  set  eyes  upon 
A scorpion.  Thinking  this  a locust,  he 
Hollow’d  his  hand,  and  stretch’d  it  eagerly 
To  grasp  his  prize.  The  reptile  saw  the  lad 
Was  guileless,  and  with  him  this  converse  had  : 
“ Boy,  get  thee  gone,  nor  hands  upon  me  lay  ! 

“ For,  catching  me,  thou’lt  cast  thine  all  away.” 


x8  4 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


LXII. 

THE  YOUNG  THIEF  AND  HIS  MOTHER. 

(p-  f.  35i  ) 

A boy  from  school  purloin’d  a comrade’s  slate, 

And  to  his  mother  bore  his  prize,  elate. 

She  took  it,  did  not  say  his  act  was  wrong, 

Or  warn  his  hands  from  what  did  not  belong 
To  them.  Ere  long  the  youth  had  learn’d  to  thieve, 
And  would  not,  untouched,  things  more  precious  leave. 
The  wonted  habit  soon  became  a trade  : 

Then,  in  the  act  of  sacrilege  way-laid 

And  caught,  with  hands  behind  him  bound  he  went 

The  road  the  lawless  are  with  hangmen  sent. 

With  tears  and  moans  his  mother  went  behind, 

And  her  son  begg’d  the  hangmen  to  be  kind, 

And  to  him  this  one  favour  to  accord, 

To  breathe  within  her  ear  some  latest  word. 

Ready  to  list,  she  near  her  offspring  drew, 

Who  violently  bit  her  ear  in  two. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


185 


When  she  deplored  such  treatment  from  her  child, 
And  the  bystanders’  language  was  not  mild 
In  blame  of  one  whose  acts  so  impious  proved 
Towards  her  that  bare  him ; “ Surely  it  behoved 
“ Her,  first  and  foremost,”  said  he,  “ to  deter 
“ My  youth  from  theft  I owe  my  wreck  to  her. 

“ ’Twas  she  who  welcomed  first  the  stolen  slate. 

“ ’Tis  she  conducts  me  now  to  Pluto’s  gate.” 


LXIIL 

THE  COCKLES. 

(p.  f.  214.) 

A-roasting  cockles,  said  a farmer’s  son, 

When  they  to  hiss  and  bubble  had  begun, 

“ Ye  senseless  creatures,  that,  with  homes  on  fire, 
“ Strike  up  a tuneful  strain,  and  join  in  choir.” 


i86 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


LX  IV. 

PROMETHEUS  AND  MANKIND . 

(p-  f.  383-) 

Prometheus  erst,  when  Jove  the  order  spake, 
Proceeded  men  and  brutes,  ’tis  said,  to  make. 

But  when  Jove  saw  that  beasts  outnumbered  men, 
He  bade  him  mix  some  of  the  brutes  again, 

And  fashion  them  into  the  human  mould. 

The  brutes  into  a lump  Prometheus  rolled, 

And  form’d  men  of  it,  e’en  as  Jove  desired. 

But,  as  for  those  so  moulded,  it  transpired 
That  in  the  change  they  gained  a human  shape, 
Yet  did  not  from  their  earlier  mind  escape  ; 

But  kept  that  to  the  end,  which  they  began 
By  sharing  with  the  brutes  and  not  with  man. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


i 


LXV. 


THE  THIRSTY  PIGEON. 

(p-  f.  357-) 

A thirsty  pigeon  on  a sign-board  spied 
A cup  of  water,  at  mid  summer-tide. 

Taking  the  picture  for  the  actual  thing, 

She  bore  down  on  it  with  a rustling  wing. 
Unwittingly  against  the  board  she  dash’d, 

And  fell  to  earth  with  wings  and  feathers  smash’d  ; 
The  cat  at  once  an  easy  prey  secured. 

Rush  upon  nought,  with  purpose  unmatured, 

If  passion  guides,  quick  ruin  is  ensured. 


i88 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


LXVI. 


THE  MAN  AND  THE  PARTRIDGE. 

(P-  F.  356.) 

A sportsman  in  his  net  a partridge  caught, 

To  sup  on  which  immediately  he  thought : 

But  for  her  life  entreating  mournfully 

She  cried,  “ Oh  spare,  and  do  not  slaughter  me, 

“ And  I for  thee  a crowd  of  birds  will  get, 

“ Decoying  ready  victims  to  thy  net.” 

Said  he,  “ Thou  silly  partridge,  stay  thy  cry ; 

“ It  is  for  this  cause  chiefly  thou  shalt  die, 

“ That  never  more  thou  may’st  betray  thy  friends.” 

Evil  design’d  for  others  ever  tends 
To  thine  own  hurt.  And  so  doth  ev’ry  plan 
Thy  malice  plots  against  a fellow-man. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


189 


LXVII. 

THE  BA  T AND  THE  CA  T 
(P.  f.  307). 

That  foe  to  every  feathered  fowl,  the  cat, 
Caught,  as  it  lay  upon  the  ground,  a bat ; 
Which,  fearing  instant  doom  without  delay, 
Endeavour’d  thus  with  pray’rs  her  fate  to  stay  : 
“ Oh,  do  not  slaughter  me,  good  cat,”  said  she, 
“ No  living  thing  hath  e’er  found  hurt  from  me. 
“ I in  the  daylight  never  quit  my  nest : 

“ When  beasts  go  out  to  hunt,  I take  my  rest, 

“ But  forth  at  moonless  dusk  I alway  fare, 

“To  get  my  food  in  dew-encumber’d  air.” 

The  cat  then  answer’d  thus  : “As  I’m  a foe 
“To  birds  in  general,  can  I let  thee  go 
“ I am  no  bird,”  was  next  the  bat’s  reply : 
“Four-footed,  fed  on  bloodless  food  am  I.” 

On  hearing  this  the  cat  its  prey  resign’d. 

’Twas  saved  from  no  small  peril,  soon  to  find 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


190 

Another  captor  of  the  feline  brood, 

Which  thought  to  take  it,  like  a mouse,  for  food. 

But  then  she  pray’d  and  said,  “No  mouse  was" 
she, 

“For  she  had  wings,  and  wing’d  no  mouse  could  !> 
be:” 

Thus  came  she  out  of  double  danger  free. 


LXVIII. 

THE  TORTOISE  AND  THE  HARE. 

(P.  F.  420.) 

To  the  shy  hare  the  tortoise  smiling  spoke, 

When  he  about  her  feet  began  to  joke  : 

“ I’ll  pass  thee  by,  though  fleeter  than  the  gale.” 

“ Pooh  !”  said  the  hare,  “ I don’t  believe  thy  tale.” 

“ Try  but  one  course,  and  thou  my  speed  shalt 
know.” 

“ Who’ll  fix  the  prize,  and  whither  we  shall  go  ? ” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


T9i 

Of  the  fleet-footed  hare  the  tortoise  asked. 

To  whom  he  answer’d,  “ Reynard  shall  be  tasked 
“ With  this  ; that  subtle  fox,  whom  thou  dost  see.” 
The  tortoise  then  (no  hesitater  she  !) 

Kept  jogging  on,  but  earliest  reached  the  post ; 

The  hare,  relying  on  his  fleetness,  lost 

Space,  during  sleep,  he  thought  he  could  recover 

When  he  awoke.  But  then  the  race  was  over ; 

The  tortoise  gain’d  her  aim,  and  slept  her  sleep. 

From  negligence  doth  care  the  vantage  reap. 


LXIX. 

THE  ROSE  AND  THE  AMARANTH 
(p.  f.  384.) 

An  amaranth  had  sprung  up  near  a rose, 

And  said,  “ Than  thee  no  flower  more  comely  grows, 
“ Long’d  for  by  gods,  and  dear  to  man,  as  well. 

“ I count  thee  blest  both  for  thy  fragrant  smell, 


19 2 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


“ And  lovely  beauty.,,  Then  the  rose  replied, 

“ Good  amaranth,  ’tis  vain  the  truth  to  hide  : 

“ For  me  the  threads  of  life  are  quick  outspun  ; 
“ For  if  not  pluck’d,  I soon  am  all  undone 
“ By  withering.  But  thou  dost  alway  bloom, 

“ And  living,  ever-green,  escape  the  tomb.” 

May  a fixt  lot  (no  matter  small  or  great) 

Be  rather  mine,  than  high  but  changeful  state. 


LXX. 

THE  SHEPHERD  AND  THE  WOLF. 

(p-  f-  374-) 

A wolf’s  young  cub  was  by  a shepherd  caught. 
This,  with  his  dogs  to  nurture,  home  he  brought. 
In  time  it  grew  up,  in  the  sheepfold  rear’d, 
Where  if  so  be  another  wolf  appear’d, 

Intent  to  rob  of  lamb  or  kid  the  fold, 

First  rank  among  the  dogs  would  this  one  hold, 


Fables  of  Babrius. 


*93 


Quickest  the  daring  robber  to  pursue. 

But  if  the  dogs  of  chasing  weary  grew, 

And  toward  the  sheepcot,  failing  to  o’ertake 
The  spoiler,  chanced  their  backward  road  to  make, 
Not,  as  in  chase,  the  tame  wolf  onward  went, 

But  for  a share  fell  in  by  accident. 

Or,  should  no  other  wolf,  to  steal  a sheep, 

Chance  from  outside  into  the  fold  to  leap, 

Then  with  the  dogs  he  made  a sly  repast- 
On  one.  The  shepherd  caught  the  rogue  at  last, 
And  from  a tree,  to  kill  him,  let  him  swing. 

Good  habits  do  not  from  ill  natures  spring. 


o 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


194 


LXXI. 

THE  OLIVE  AND  THE  FIG - TREE. 

(P.  F.  124.) 

Olive  and  Fig-tree  strove  for  beauty’s  prize. 

“ At  no  time,”  said  the  first,  “ my  foliage  dies, 
a But  the  fig’s  bloom  is  put  forth,  once  for  all, 

“ At  one  set  season,  and  is  then  but  small.” 

So  then  to  her  the  fig-tree  made  reply : 

“ Nay ! but  when  snows  fall  from  the  wintry  sky, 

“ And  settle  in  thy  leaves,  still  in  their  bloom, 

“ Thy  beauteous  freshness  doth  but  bring  thee  doom. 
“ Whereas,  on  finding  me  of  foliage  quit,  ^ 

“ Snow  falls  to  earth.  I am  unhurt  by  it.” 

>- 

To  man’s  disgrace  tends  beauty  void  of  wit.  > 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


195 


LXXII. 

THE  PARD  AND  THE  FOX. 

(P.  F.  42.) 

Once  did  a spotted  pard  to  boast  begin 
Of  all  the  brute-kind  the  most  various  skin, 
To  whom  said  Reynard  : “ Be  it  so  ! Yet  I 
“ Possess  a mind  of  more  variety 
“ Than  thy  skin  or  thy  mind.” 

Each  magnifies 

That  which  within  his  own  possession  lies. 

LXXIII. 

THE  FOX  AND  THE  HEDGEHOG. 
(p.  F.  36.  Aristot.  Rhet.  II.  20.) 

^Esop  in  Samos  to  a chief,  his  friend, 

Upon  his  trial,  wishing  aid  to  lend — 

This  chief  was  of  the  wealthiest  in  the  isle — 
With  this  apt  fable  did  the  mob  beguile. 


o 2 


196 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


Crossing  a rapid  stream  a fox  one  day 
By  the  tide’s  violence  was  borne  away 
Into  the  deep  gorge  of  a rocky  hole, 

There  falling  down  she  lay,  poor  fainting  soul, 
Wholly  unable  from  her  place  to  move, 

And  long  with  her  sad  plight  but  feebly  strove. 

Then  upon  her  a swarm  of  dog-ticks  burst, 

Craving  for  food,  to  suck  her  blood  athirst. 

But  a stray  hedgehog  spied  her  troubled  state, 

And,  to  her  sufferings  compassionate, 

Ask’d,  runs  the  story,  “ If  her  wish  would  be 
“ The  dog-ticks’  slaughter?”  “ By  no  means,”  said  sh 
“ I pray  you  by  the  Nymphs,  this  swarm  disperse.” 

“ Why  would  you  not  be  rid  of  such  a curse  ?” 

The  hedgehog  asked  again.  “ Because  e’en  now 
“ These  in  each  vein  are  full  of  blood,  I trow  !” 
Replied  sly  Reynard,  “ What  they  drain  is  slight. 

“ Get  rid  of  these  when  full,  and  you  invite 
“ Others  to  come,  a famine-wasted  force, 

“ And  wholly  suck  my  blood  without  remorse.” 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


197 


LXXIV. 

THE  SOW  AND  THE  BITCH . 

(p.  f.  409.) 

The  sow  and  bitch  betwixt  them  held  dispute 
Which  was  best  breeder.  Said  the  sow,  “No  brute 
“ With  four  legs  bears  more  quick  than  I,  you’ll  find.” 
“ Yes,”  said  the  bitch,  “ but  then  your  whelps  are 
blind.” 


LXXV. 

THE  SOW  AND  THE  BITCH 
(P.  F.  408. ) 

A sow  and  bitch  each  other  did  revile. 

The  first,  by  her  who  guards  Cythera’s  isle, 

Sware  with  her  teeth  the  other’s  bones  to  break. 

The  bitch  then  mock’d  the  thought  a sow  should  take 
An  oath  by  Venus,  as  her  favourite. 

“ That  thou  shouldst  swear  by  Venus,  sure,  is  fit  ! 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


“ For  thou,  ;tis  plain,  by  her  art  most  beloved, 

“ Seeing  that  she  hath  from  her  fane  removed 
“ Farthest  the  men  that  make  a meal  of  pork.” 
Then  grunts  the  sow,  whose  wits  were  all  at  work 
“ Learn  thou  that  it  from  this  is  chiefly  seen, 

“ How  much  beloved  I am  by  beauty’s  queen ; 

“ For  hating  him  that  seeks  to  do  me  hurt, 

“ Or  dares  to  kill  me,  him  she  doth  avert. 

“ But  thou  hast  an  ill-savour,  live  or  dead.” 

A man  of  sense  converts  whate’er  is  said 
By  evil  speakers,  mockery  to  raise, 

Through  skilful  handling  into  real  praise. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


199 


LXXVI. 

GOODS  AND  EVILS. 

(P.  F.  I.) 

Evils  once  thrust  the  blessings  all  away 
From  their  free  sojourn  midst  the  sons  of  clay. 

For  hosts  of  evils  had  the  earth  possest. 

Then  did  the  blessings  soar  to  Heaven,  in  quest 
Of  satisfaction  on  th’  usurping  race, 

Nor  deign’d  with  such  to  tarry  in  one  place. 

In  blending  them  Nature  had  been  to  blame  ! 

How  could  they  mix,  if,  evermore  the  same, 
Jarring  and  quick-to-clash  are  man’s  affairs  1 
To  fix  their  rule,  to  Jove  they  lift  their  pray’rs. 

J ove’s  fiat  was  : “ Let  ills  be  mixt  below. 

“ Singly  among  men  be  it  yours  to  go  !” 

Hence  then  it  is,  that  ills  in  numbers  run  : 

For  they  are  join’d,  and  go  not  one  by  one. 

But  all  good  things  come  down  from  Jove  to  men, 
Each  to  but  one  or  two,  and  slowly  then. 


200 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


LXXVII. 

THE  CAMEL  AND  JUPITER. 

(p.  F.  184.) 

Grudging  a bull  its  horns  the  camel  went, 
Pray'rs  for  the  like  at  Jove's  throne  to  present. 
Jove  in  disgust,  because  she  wish’d  for  more, 
Though  she  had  a fine,  stalwart  frame  before, 
Not  only  gives  no  horns,  but  also  shears, 

To  check  her  grasping,  somewhat  from  her  ears. 

To  seek  what  fate  omits,  unmeet  appears. 


LXXVIII. 

THE  DANCING  MONKEYS. 

(p.  f.  360.) 

To  teach  some  apes  bethought  him  Egypt's  king 
The  Pyrrhic  dance.  Of  every  living  thing 
Apes  are  most  imitative.  What  men  do 
Under  their  notice,  they  will  copy  too. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


201 


Dress’d  then  in  bright  and  elegant  array, 

These  famous  maskers  set  about  their  play, 

With  many  looking  on.  Most  gracefully 
Awhile  they  acted  : till  a stander-by, 

A fine  smart  fellow,  from  his  vest  let  drop 
Handfuls  of  nuts,  and  brought  them  to  a stop. 
These,  spilt  around,  the  apes  no  sooner  view, 
Than  they  cease  dancing,  tear  their  robes  in  two, 
Smash  all  their  masks,  and  rush  on  these  amain, 
Making  their  monkey-breeding  vastly  plain. 

To  change  one's  nature  is  but  toil  in  vain. 


LXXIX. 

THE  FOX  AND  THE  GOA  T. 
(p.  F.  45.) 

A goat  athirst,  when  it  beheld  a pool, 
Descended  a deep  gorge,  its  heat  to  cool. 
He  drank,  ere  he  discover’d  how  unwise 
Was  his  descent.  Alone  he  could  not  rise 


202 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


From  out  the  pit.  He  paused,  look’d  up,  and  sought 
Assistance.  Thirst  had  just  then  Reynard  brought 
To  pass  the  opening.  She  the  goat  espied, 

And  ask’d  him,  if  the  stream  a draught  supplied. 

“ Ay  ! and  as  clear  as  crystal !”  answered  he, 

“ But  the  hole’s  steep,  its  outlet  hard  to  see.” 

The  Fox  then  to  the  broad-beard  made  reply  : 

“ Faint  not  at  that  : I look’d  down  from  on  high, 

“ And  judg’d  that  thence  ’twas  easy  to  ascend. 

“ Come,  make  thine  horns  against  the  pit  side  bend,’ 
Thus  said  the  Fox,  “ that  I may  come  down  so : 

“ Then  running  up  I’ll  drag  thee  from  below/* 

She  came  down,  drank,  and  went  up  from  the  pit, 
Yet,  after  all,  help’d  not  the  goat  a bit. 

And  when  he  blamed  her  base  ingratitude, 

Then  the  fox  made  this  observation  rude  : 

“ Nay  ! if  of  sense  you’d  had  as  large  a share,  h 

“ As  you  can  boast  a wavy  beard  of  hair,  > 

‘ Not  without  egress  had  you  been  down  there.”  ; 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


203 


LXXX. 

THE  BEES  AND  JUPITER. 

(P.  F.  287.) 

The  Hymettian  bee,  a mother  of  the  combs, 

Once  with  a gift  approach’d  the  heavenly  homes, 
Honey  for  Jove,  fresh-gather’d  from  the  hives, 
Honey,  in  which  o’er  smoke  and  age  survives 
A flow’ry  scent.  Delighted  with  the  gift 
Jove  sware  to  grant  the  pray’r  she  might  uplift. 

“ Grant  me  a sting,  that  if  by  men,”  she  said, 

“ Upon  my  combs  a rifling  hand  be  laid, 

“ I may,  by  stinging  such,  my  hurters  slay.” 

Angry  was  Jove  to  hear  the  insect  pray 
For  man’s  destruction  : yet,  however  loth, 

He  could  but  grant  where  he  had  pledged  his  oath. 
The  sting,  however,  which  he  gave,  was  such, 

That  when  bees  smite,  they  perish  with  the  touch. 
Her  sting  the  life,  that  keeps  her  on  the  wing, 

She  leaves  that  life  where’er  she  leaves  her  sting. 


204 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


LXXXI. 

THE  SON  AND  THE  FA  THER. 

(p.  F.  349.) 

A timid  old  man  had  a valiant  boy, 

And  dream’d  he  saw  a lion  him  destroy. 

So  fearing  lest  the  dream  should  be  fulfill’d, 

A pleasant  room  for  him  he  set  to  build  : 

And,  as  some  solace  for  vexation  sore, 

Had  wild  beasts  painted  o’er  each  wall  and  door. 
Among  them  was  the  lion’s  picture  shown. 

So  when  on  this  the  young  man’s  glance  was  thrown, 
Rage  and  chagrin  more  fiercely  on  him  press’d, 

And  standing  near,  the  lion  he  addrest : 

“ O worst  of  brutes,  because  my  father’s  eye 
“ In  dreamy  sleep  did  once  behold  a lie, 

“ I am  thus  idly  prison’d  for  a dream. 

“ On  thee  what  vengeance  shall  sufficient  seem  ] ” 
Threatening  the  lion  with  his  words  so  grand, 

The  young  man  through  a panel  thrust  his  hand, 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


205 


To  break  a splint  from  a bush  near  the  wall, 
Meaning  to  burn  the  lion  as  tinder  small : 

But  as  the  prickles  chanced  to  wound  his  thumb, 
Quick  was  the  swelling  to  his  waist  to  come. 
Opprest  with  wracking  pain  the  young  man  lay, 
And  soon  his  anguish  took  his  speech  away : 

O’er  Acheron’s  stream,  poor  wretch,  another  fare. 

What  fate  allots  thee,  be  resign’d  to  bear. 

Nor  seek  by  shifts  thy  destiny  to  cheat. 

For  what  must  come,  ’tis  best  a man  should  meet. 


LXXXII. 

THE  WILD  BOAR  AND  THE  FOX. 
(p.  F.  407.) 

A wild  boar  once  stood  at  an  old  tree’s  foot, 
Whetting  his  tusks.  The  query  Reynard  put : 
What  fancy  led  him  thus  his  tusks  to  whet, 
No  risk  being  near,  no  hunter  to  beset 


20  6 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


His  path — in  fact,  no  need.  The  boar  replied, 

“ I,  like  a fool,  should  wretchedly  have  died 
“ Oft,  had  I sought  arms  but  when  danger  prest.” 


Man’s  life  is  all  a plot.  Be  ready,  lest 
Evil  befall.  Precaution’s  ever  best. 


LXXXIIL 

THE  LIONESS  AND  THE  BEASTS. 

(P.  F.  24O.) 

An  answer  to  the  quadrupeds  once  came, 

That  put  their  boasts  of  fruitfulness  to  shame. 

In  truth  they  went  and  tax’d  the  lioness, 

Wishing  against  her  to  prove  barrenness. 

“ Come  tell  thou  us,  how  many  cubs  dost  bear  1” 
She  smiled,  and  met  them  with  this  answer  rare, 

“ But  one,  yet  he  is  thoroughbred  all  o’er.” 


Than  hosts  of  fools  one  man  of  sense  is  more. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


207 


LXXXIV. 

THE  BALD  RIDER. 

(P.  F.  410.) 

A bald  man  in  a wig  did  ride  a race  : 

A sudden  gust  dislodged  it  from  its  place. 

It  flew  aloft,  by  breezy  motion  borne, 

And  the  by-standers  laugh’d  the  man  to  scorn. 
But  said  the  bald-head,  as  he  ceased  to  ride, 

“ What  marvel  if  strange  locks  refused  to  bide 
“ Where  mine  own  hair  had  long  deserted  me?” 

Vexed  at  the  loss  of  goods  let  no  man  be : 

For  borrowers  of  this  life’s  things  are  we. 


208 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


LXXXV. 

THE  CRANE  AND  THE  FOX. 

(p.  F.  34.) 

The  Libyan  crane  and  shameless  fox  agreed 
That  each  by  turns  would  with  the  other  feed. 
Sly  Reynard  only  set  some  greasy  broth 
Before  her  guest,  pour’d  on  a broad  plate  forth  ; 
And  bade  her  of  the  feast  to  take  her  fill. 

Much  fun  she  caused,  as  evermore  her  bill 
With  useless  toil  she  struck  against  the  ware, 
Whilst  of  the  broth  it  failed  to  gain  a share. 

The  Libyan  bird  then  sought  to  entertain 
The  roguish  fox,  and  play  the  host  would  fain . 
Of  barley-meal  a thin-necked  jar  was  full, 

And  out  of  this  her  bill,  thrust  in,  could  pull 
Enough  of  food.  So  now  the  laugh  had  she 
At  Reynard,  who  stood  gaping  hungrily. 

The  fox’s  snout  would  not  the  jar-neck  fit. 

For  what  you  do  to  others,  they’ll  be  quit. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


209 


LXXXVI. 

THE  HUSBANDMAN  AND  THE  LICE. 

(p.  f.  41 1.) 

A ploughman  was  half  eaten  up  by  lice. 

Leaving  his  plough,  he  shook  his  garment  twice. 
When  a third  time  they  bit  him  shamelessly, 
Wishing  by  all  means  of  them  to  get  free, 

Lest  cleanliness  should  loss-of-work  require, 

He  doff’d  his  clothes,  and  threw  them  on  the  fire. 

I would  not  have  him  thrice  from  fire  abstain, 
Who  twice  hath  lost  his  wits  by  woman’s  bane. 


p 


210 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


LXXXVII. 

THE  BRAZIER  AND  HIS  DOG. 

(p.  F.  413.) 

A brazier  in  his  house  a pet-dog  kept ; 

And  while  the  master  forged,  the  spaniel  slept ; 
But  when  the  master  dined,  he  rose  from  sleep, 
A fawning  watch  for  scraps  and  bones  to  keep. 
The  man  once  shook  his  staff  in  angry  mood, 
And  said,  “ Most  wretched  of  the  canine  brood, 
“ What  shall  I do  with  such  a slumbering  cur, 

“ From  laziness  so  strong,  so  hard  to  stir  ? 

“ Dost  thou  not  know  that  toil  alone  doth  send 
“ Gifts  that  are  good  % ” 


Fd  have  thee,  without  end. 
An  idler’s  ears  with  this  sound  warning  fill ; 

?Tis  idleness  that  makes  a man  fare  ill. 


7 he  Fables  of  Babrius. 


21 1 


LXXXVIII. 

THE  HUSBANDMAN  AND  THE  VIPER. 

(p.  F.  97.) 

It  happen’d  to  a labourer  to  behold 
A viper  frozen  by  excessive  cold, 

At  winter,  in  the  fields.  By  pity  press’d, 

He  lifted  it  and  placed  it  in  his  breast, 

Hoping  to  kindle  vital  warmth  anew. 

Away  the  viper,  quick  reviving,  threw 
Its  numbness,  and  the  friendly  rustic  stung, 

Who  said,  a-dying,  as  from  him  he  flung 
The  snake  : “ I spared  the  wretch.  My  doom  is 
meet. 

“ When  whole,  I should  have  crush’d  it  ’neath  my 
feet.” 


p 2 


212 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


LXXXIX. 

WINTER  AND  SPRING. 

(p.  f.  414.) 

Hoar  Winter  strung  these  words,  to  jeer  at  Spring  : 

“ To  none  doth  thine  appearance  quiet  bring, 

“ One  to  the  groves,  to  fields  another  hies 
“ In  haste,  or  where  the  woodland  valley  lies. 

“To  such  the  choicest  early  flowers  are  treats, 

“ Lilies,  or  roses  ever-breathing  sweets, 

“ They  cull  to  glad  the  eye,  the  wreath  to  twine  : 
“These  gifts  hath  Spring.  But  these  are  less  than 
mine. 

“ For  I,  who  ride  upon  the  sea-dash’d  prows, 

“ Disturb  the  waves,  the  stormy  wind  arouse. 

“ By  me  the  rains  and  frozen  hails  are  brought ; 

“ And  lumps  of  snow  to  icy  substance  wrought : 

“ So  that  all  tarry,  while  I last,  at  home, 

“ At  hearth  or  board,  and  do  not  care  to  roam ; 


The  Fables  of  Babrius* 


213 


u But  revel  in  the  sweet  sound  of  the  lyre, 

“ Strains  of  melodious  song,  and  youthful  choir. 
iC  These  are  all  Winter’s  makeweights,  you  must  know ! 
“ And  granted  that  delight  and  praises  flow 
“ From  men’s  lips  at  thy  name ; yet  while  I shed 
“ Charms  o’er  men’s  homes,  my  name  is  cherished 
“ By  those  who  rightly  judge,  as  sweet  of  sound.” 

For  thine,  o’er  strange  goods,  claim  not  higher  [> 
ground ; 

For  e’en  in  these  some  beauty  may  be  found. 


XC. 

THE  SWALLOWS  AND  THE  SWANS . 

(P.  F.  416.) 

Gibes  at  the  snow-white  swans  the  swallows  threw, 
Because  they  from  men’s  company  withdrew, 

But  loved  to  hover  round  the  meads,  and  bide 
By  the  marsh-pools,  and  by  the  river  side, 


214 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


Delighting  most  of  all  to  dwell  apart, 

And  keep  remote  from  crowds  their  tuneful  art. 

“ Our  charm  is  in  great  cities,  men  and  all, 

“ In  roof,  and  chamber,  corridor  and  hall,” 

Thus  said  the  swallows,  “ And  we  chirp  our  tale 
“ Most  sweetly ; yea,  the  old  establish’d  wail 
“ Babbled  from  ancient  days  to  th’  Attic  race, 

“ Of  Athens  and  Pandion,  Tereus,  Thrace, 

“ Exile  and  marriage,  mutilated  tongue, 

“ Wrongs,  writing-tablets,  Itys  slaughter’d  young  : 
“ How  we  had  long  a shape  with  men  the  same, 
“ But  then,  by  transformation,  birds  became.” 
More  said  the  Attic  maids  in  such-like  strain, 
Yet  did  the  swans  to  answer  scarcely  deign, 

Nor  then  till  late.  They  hated  wordy  tales. 
Their  answer  giv’n,  of  wit  in  no  way  fails. 

“ Oh,  prating  children  of  Athenian  birth, 

“ All  men  would  seek  lone  corners  of  the  earth, 

“ From  love  of  song,  with  gladness  for  our  sakes, 
“ When  Zephyr,  blowing  soft  and  sweetly,  makes 
“ Our  wings  relax,  and  idly  catch  the  breeze ; 

“ For  such  would  list  to  honied  melodies. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


2I5 


a Therefore  it  is  we  sing  some  trifling  song  : 
a Albeit  afar  from  every  human  throng, 

“ And  that  but  rarely.  ’Tis  our  fairest  boast 
“ That  measure  in  our  strains  we  study  most, 

“ Nor  let  our  muses  mingle  with  the  crowd. 

“ But  that  of  you  men  weary  ’tis  allowed, 

“ Nor  will  your  nearness  calmly  tolerate ; 

“ For  your  unmeasured  twittering  they  hate. 

“ Yet  in  all  this  ye  suffer  but  your  due, 

“Since  with  your  tongues  cut  out,  ’twere  well  ye 
knew 

“The  charm  of  silence,  and  your  prate  gave  o’er 
“ Of  shameful  wrongs,  which  in  the  house  ye  bore. 

“ But,  not  the  less,  ye  babble  most  of  all, 

“ Yet  no  melodious  utterance  let  fall ; 

“ For  ever  is  the  maimed  tongue  deplored, 

“ And  Itys  slain  by  Zethus  with  the  sword.” 


2l6 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


XCI. 

THE  TWO  POTS. 

(P.  F.  422.) 

A river  on  its  stream  two  pots  convey’d  : 

One  was  of  brass,  and  one  of  clay  was  made. 
The  latter  to  the  former,  floating  nigh. 

Cried,  “ Float  afar,  and  do  not  sail  hard  by  : 
u For  if  you  nearer  draw,  I’m  sure  to  break.” 

A poor  man’s  house  is  very  apt  to  shake. 
When  men  of  greater  power  are  dwelling  near. 
And  injury  from  them  may  fairly  fear. 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


217 


XCII. 

THE  FLEA  AND  THE  WRESTLER. 
(p.  f.  424,  b.) 

Upon  a wrestler’s  foot  once  perch’d  a flea. 

He  moved.  It  hopp’d  and  bit  him  sturdily. 
Then  was  he  wroth,  and  fain  would  it  secure  ; 
Again  it  hopp’d,  and  got  off  safe  and  sure. 

The  wrestler  worried,  though  by  bites  of  fleas, 
Cried  groaning,  “ Wilt  not  aid  me,  Hercules  ? ” 

It  is  mere  insult  to  the  Gods  above 
To  pray  them  lesser  evils  to  remove. 


2 l8 


The  Fables  of  Babrius. 


XCIII. 

THE  FLEA  AND  THE  MAN 
(p.  f.  424.) 

A flea,  which  bit  his  foot,  annoy’d  a man. 

He  caught  it,  and  to  ask  of  it  began, 

“ Who  art  thou,  that  thou  dost  so  sharply  bite, 

“ And  puncture  all  my  body  with  delight  ? ” 

Said  it  to  him  : “ My  life  I thus  sustain. 

“ Spare  me  : of  no  great  harm  can  you  complain.” 
And  he  in  anger  made  it  this  reply, 

“Therefore  by  these  hands  thou  shaft  straightway 
die. 

“ For  what  is  evil,  be  it  great  or  small, 

“ I would  not  have  exist,  to  hurt  at  all.” 


The  Tables  of  Babrius. 


219 


XCIV. 

THE  FLEA  AND  THE  OX. 

(P.  F.  426.) 

Once  of  an  ox  a flea  this  question  ask’d  : 

“ Why  do  you  bear  by  mortals  to  be  task’d, 

“ And  daily  toil  for  them,  since  surely  you 
“ Are  a courageous  brute,  a fine  one  too  ? 

“ Whereas  I bite  their  flesh,  though  small  to  see, 

“ And  fearless  drink  their  red  blood  greedily.” 

The  ox  replied,  “ To  men  I know  my  debt. 

“ From  them  I ever  care  and  kindness  met. 

“ My  forehead  and  my  shoulders  oft  they  stroke, 

“ And  scratch  and  rub  me,  pleasure  to  provoke.” 
To  the  strong  ox  the  flea  then  answer  made, 

“ Ah  ! but  to  luckless  me  this  rubbing  trade, 

“ You  talk  of,  would  result  in  death  outright, 

“ Whene’er  upon  me  men’s  nails  chanced  to  light.” 

We  ever  love  the  hand  that  doth  us  good. 

But  requite  hurt  with  hurt,  in  vengeful  mood. 


220 


The  Fables  of  Babrius . 


XCV. 

THE  ASS'S  SHADOW. 

(p.  F.  339.) 

A man  of  Athens  on  a summer’s  day, 

To  Megara  was  fain  to  make  his  way 
On  a pack-ass,  he  hired  for  a fixt  sum. 

So  as  he  journey’d,  when  midday  was  come, 

What  time  the  sun  pours  down  his  beaming  heat, 
Under  the  ass’s  shade  he  sought  retreat, 

To  shelter  from  the  sun’s  excessive  rays. 

But  the  ass-driver  now  his  right  gainsays  : 

“ Th?  agreement  was  for  seat,  and  not  for  shade.7’ 
To  which  the  other  said,  “that  he  had  paid 
“ For  the  whole  ass,  and  so  its  shadow  bought.” 

So  strifes  about  a shadow  come  to  nought. 


FINIS. 


NOTES  TO  BABRIUS. 


NOTES  TO  BABRIUS. 


PART  I. 


Proem  II.  5.— Cybisas,  or  Cybissus.  Theon  and  Apthonius, 
later  teachers  of  rhetoric,  mention  Cybissus-  the  Libyan,  and 
Connis  the  Cilician,  as  fabulists.  Cf.  Muller  and  Donaldson, 
Gr.  Lit.  i.  193.  Fables  of  the  Phrygians,  Cilicians,  and  Cypri- 
ans, are  mentioned  by  Greek  writers.  See  Bernhardy,  Vol.  I. 
p.  58. 

Fab.  XII. — This  fable  is  based  on  the  mythical  story  of 
Procne,  Philomela,  and  Itys.  The  former  of  the  sisters  was 
transformed  into  a swallow,  the  latter  into  a nightingale.  And 
the  fable  expresses  the  habits  of  each  bird,  the  one  building  its 
nest  near  men’s  homes,  and  under  their  roofs,  the  other  apart  in 
far  retreats.  See  Ov.  Met,  vi.  668.  For  a full  account  of  the 
legend,  the  English  reader  may  consult  Grote’s  History  of  Greece, 
Vol.  I.  p.  269 — 271.  Compare  also  Babrius,  Part  II.  Fab. 

XXXVII.  and  Fab.  XC.  on  the  same  subject. 

Ibid.  v.  22. — Philomela’s  woes  began  after  she  had  left 
Athens,  on  a visit  to  her  sister  Procne,  whose  husband  Tereus 
conceived  for  her  a fatal  passion,  which  caused  all  the  tragic  tale, 
on  which  the  Greek  poets  so  much  delight  to  dwell. 

Fab.  XXXI. — See  preface  with  reference  to  the  confusion 


224 


Notes  to  Babrius. 


between  ctfXovpos  and  ya\ rj,  observable  in  Babrius  and  elsewhere. 
And  see  Notes  and  Queries,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  261 — 3.  “The  ancient 
names  of  the  cat.  ” 

Fab.  XXXII. — The  Pleiads  were  the  daughters  (seven  in 
number)  of  Atlas  and  Pleione.  They  were  transformed  into  a 
cluster  of  stars  at  the  back  of  Taurus,  whose  rising  was  in  April 
or  May,  and  their  setting  in  November.  Theocr.  Id.  xiii.  25. 
Virg.  Georg,  iv.  231.  Hesiod  (Works  and  Days,  384)  places 
the  time  for  ploughing  at  the  season  of  their  setting. 

Fab.  XL VI. — v.  9,  10.  The  stag  was  anciently  supposed  to 
be  an  exceedingly  long  lived  animal ; but  the  opinion  is  confuted 
by  Aristotle,  H.  A.  vi.  29,  and  by  later  experience.  It’s  life 
is  at  most  from  thirty- five  to  forty  years  in  duration,  according  to 
Buffon  and  Cuvier. 

Fab.  LVIII. — In  this  fable  Babrius  follows  the  later  version 
of  the  story  of  Pandora’s  Box,  i.  e . that  it  was  full  of  goods  not 
of  ills . The  old  version  is  mentioned  in  Hesiod,  Works  and 
Days,  94 — 105.  There,  however,  we  read  of  Hope  being  left 
behind  after  the  rest.  As  also,  in  Theognis,  1131  — 1146,  we 
read  of  Hope  remaining  alone  on  earth,  after  Faith,  and  Modesty 
and  the  Graces  had  removed  to  Heaven. 

Fab.  LXIII. — Ancient  writers,  such  as  Xenocrates,  Em- 
pedocles, and  to  a certain  extent  Plato,  treat  the  remnants  of 
the  half  wicked  silver  age  as  daemons  ; not  good,  as  Hesiod  held 
and  represented  them,  but  malignant  and  wicked.  See  Grote 
H.  G.  i.  pp.  95 — 7.  Ibid.  570 — 1,  note.  Here  the  heroes  are  con- 
founded with  these  daemons.  Compare  Plut.  Quaest.  Graec.  c. 
vi.  p.  292,  where  it  appears  that  with  the  Locrians  at  Opus 
tiaifxccv  was  equivalent  to  ‘'Hpoos. 

For  the  custom  of  wreathing  the  altars  with  fillets,  alluded  to 
in  v.  3 of  this  fable,  compare  Theocr.  Id.  xxvi.  3 — 9,  Horat.  Od. 
iv.  xi.  6,  i.  xix.  13.  Virg.  Eel.  viii.  64. 


Notes  to  Babrius. 


225 


Fab.  LX VI. — Babrius  here  adheres  to  the  later  fable,  about 
Prometheus  creating  men,  traces  of  which  occur  in  Callimachus, 
and  elsewhere.  He  places  him  among  the  Gods,  but  the  Gods 
of  the  earliest  period.  For  other  fables  in  Babrius  on  the  subject 
of  Prometheus  making  man,  see  Part  II,  Fab.  64,  which  gives  a 
similar  version  of  the  creation  of  man  by  him,  to  that  of  Horace, 
Od.  i.  xvi.  1 3,  Fertur  Prometheus  adder e principi , &°e. 

Fab.  LXVIII.  4. — For  the  custom  of  placing  the  lots  in  a 
helmet,  compare  Horn.  II.  vii.  176,  where  the  lots  are  placed  in 
Agamemnon’s  helmet,  which  is  then  shaken  by  Nestor. 

Ibid.  7. — The  garden  of  Hesperus,  or  of  the  Hesperides, 
was  in  the  more  early  writers  placed  at  the  remotest  bound  of 
the  earth,  afterwards  at  the  extreme  west,  on  the  coast  of  Libya. 
Hesiod,  Theog.  215,  Plin.  H.  N.  vi.  36,  Virg.  JEn.  iv.  484,  Ov. 
Met.  iv.  632 — 8. 

Fab.  LXXI. — Compare  Cicero  Pro  Cluentio,  c.  49,  Herodot. 
vii.  16. 

Fab.  LXXII.  v.  6. — Grote,  in  his  History  of  Greece,  Vol.  II. 
p.  289,  remarks  upon  the  inadequacy  and  irregularity  of  the 
supply  of  water  in  the  low  grounds  of  Greece.  “ Most  of  the 
rivers  are  torrents  in  the  early  spring,  and  dry  before  the  end  of 
summer.  Rain  runs  off  as  rapidly  as  it  falls,  and  springs  are 
rare.  ” Horace  refers  to  this  fable  of  the  daw  in  his  Epistles,  i. 
iii.  18 — 20. 

Fab.  LXXXV. — Bergk,  in  a paper  in  the  Classical  Museum, 
Vol.  iii.  pp.  130— 134,  thinks  that  this  fable,  with  its  enumeration 
of  Acarnanian,  Dolopian,  Molossian,  Cretan  dogs,  &c.  refers  to 
the  Achaean  league,  and  to  Aratus,  as  the  Achaean  dog  chosen  as 
the  leader.  He  considers  the  wolves  to  be  no  other  than  the 
/Etolian  league,  and  from  this  fable  he  gathers  his  chief  argument 
for  supposing  King  Alexander  to  be  Alexander  of  Corinth  and 
Nicaea. 


Q 


226 


Notes  to  Babruis. 


Fab.  XCV.  22. — Of  the  hatred  of  stags  for  all  the  serpent 
tribe,  see  Plin.  Nat.  His.  viii.  50,  xxii.  37,  yElian.  N.  A.  II.  9. 

Dioscorides  De  Mat.  Med.  III.  73,  and  Pliny  1.  c.  state  that 
serpents  do  not  take  hurt  from  the  bites  of  serpents,  if  they  feed 
on  the  plant  “ elaphoboscos  ” ; and  that  the  seed  of  this  plant 
mixed  with  wine  is  a cure  for  the  bites  of  serpents. 

Fab.  XCVIII. — Dubner  and  Lachmann  agree  in  thinking  the 
epimyth  spurious  here,  and  so  does  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis.  It  is 
therefore  not  translated  in  this  version.  Eumenes  exposed  to 
the  Macedonians  the  perfidy  of  his  adversary’s  offers  by  quoting 
this  fable.  Cf.  Thirlwall,  Hist.  Gr.  vii.  p.  273,  4. 

Fab.  CVII. — The  epimyth  of  this  fable  has  not  been  tran- 
slated, because  in  addition  to  being  judged  to  be  spurious,  it 
lacks  point. 

Fab.  CVIII. — Compare  Hor.  Sat.  II.  vi.  79.  See  also  Fab. 
XCIX  above.  As  to  the  Camirsean  fig  mentioned  in  v.  25,  see 
Smith’s  Diet.  Gr.  Rom.  Geogr.  Vol.  I.  pp.  713,  5.  Camirus 
was  a town  of  Rhodes,  one  of  the  three  most  ancient  in  the 
island,  which  was  famous  for  its  wine,  raisins,  and  figs. 

Fab.  CXV.  7 — Respecting  the  riches  and  vast  commerce  of  the 
Red  Sea,  or  Mare  Erythraeum,  see  Smith’s  Diet.  Gr.  Rom. 
Geogr.  Vol  II.  857,  8.  See  also  the  fabulist  Avianus,  Fab.  II. 

Fab.  CXXV. — This  fable  should  be  carefully  compared  with 
the  54th  fable  in  the  second  part  of  the  original.  The  object  of 
the  translator  has  been  to  include  in  the  125th  fable  of  this  part, 
the  result  of  a careful  comparison  of  the  two  slightly  differing 
texts.  This  fable  is  one  which  has  been  reduced  to  choliambic 
metres,  from  the  prose  MSS.  of  the  Vatican,  see  F.  De  Furia, 
p.  150.  Aristotle  H.  A.  x.  6.  mentions  the  Maltese  dog,  kwIHiov 
MeAtrcuoy. 

Fab.  CXXVIII. — This  fable,  like  the  125th,  had  been  restored 
to  its  metrical  choliambic  form  before  the  discovery  of  the  MS. 


Notes  toBabrius. 


227 


of  Babrius.  See  the  edition  of  F.  De  Furia,  Fab.  365.  The 
translation  is  based  on  a comparison  of  this  fable  and  of  fab.  5 1, 
in  the  second  part. 

Fragm.  1. — The 'same  may  be  said  here,  as  with  reference  to 
fables  125  and  128.  The  fragment  is  easy  of  completion  if  we 
compare  with  it  Fab.  53,  in  Part  II. 


PART  II. 


Proem.  Fab.  I. — For  the  murder  of  ^Esop  by  the  Delphians, 
who  did  not  agree  with  him  respecting  the  distribution  of  money 
among  the  citizens,  with  which  he  had  been  charged  by 
Croesus,  see  Plutarch  de  ser.  Num.  vind.  p.  556.  The  Del- 
phians  repented,  and  granted  compensation  to  his  grandson.  See 
Smith,  D.  G.  R.  B.  vol.  i.  p.  47.“ 

Fab.  II. — Cf.  Aristoph.  Av.  474. 

Fab.  V. — Compare  Ovid.  Fast.  I.  357.  See,  too,  Virg.  Georg. 

II-  374—9- 

Fab.  XI. — Compare  the  slightly  varied  fable  of  Babrius,  p.  1. 
Fab.  52. 

Fab.  XIII. — The  Galli,  or  priests  of  Cybele,  seem  to  have 
had  their  origin  in  Phrygia,  and  to  have  been  chosen  always 
from  a poor  and  despised  race  of  people;  for  while  no  other 
priests  were  allowed  to  beg,  the  Galli  were  permitted  to  do  so  on 
certain  days.  Compare  Cicero  de  Leg.  II.  c.  9 and  16.  Smith’s 
Diet.  G.  R.  A.  447/ 

Ibid. — V.  6,  7.  Atys  or  Attis  was  a beautiful  shepherd  of 
Phrygia,  beloved  by  Cybele,  whence  arose  all  his  misfortunes. 
See  Ovid.  Fast.  iv.  221 — 44.  His  death  was  annually  bewailed 
by  the  Galli.  Compare  the  poem  on  the  subject  of  Atys  in 


22  8 


Notes  to  Babrius. 


Catullus,  LXIII. — These  references  will  explain  the  allusions 
in  the  text  of  this  fable. 

Fab.  XVI.  2. — A slight  emendation  of  the  Greek  text  suggests 
itself  to  the  translator,  viz.  to  read  aairep  for  wairep,  and  to  omit 
the  comma  after  eludei.  This  gives  an  intelligible  sense  to  the 
passage,  and  facilitates  translation.  In  the  next  fable  verses 
13 — 17  are  evidently  imperfect,  and  it  is  hopeless  to  attempt  a 
literal  translation.  An  approximatory  guess  is  the  translator’s 
only  resource. 

Fab.  XXII. — Compare  with  this  fable  that  which  occurs  as 
Fable  71  of  the  first  part.  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis  illustrates  the  reply 
of  the  sea  in  v.  9 — 14,  by  a distich  of  Solon,  from  which  it 
appears  to  have  originated  (p.  21,  ed.  Schneidewin),  and  by  the 
speech  of  Artabanus  to  Xerxes,  Herodot.  vii.  16.  In  the  last 
verse  of  the  fable  we  would  read, 

toIs  SpcocrLV  ovxl,  toictiv  alriois  fltfJifpOV. 

Fab.  XXIV. — Compare  Part  I.  Fab.  LIX.  The  epimyths 
present  the  chief  difference  between  the  two. 

Fab.  XXVIII. — Compare  the  epimyth  of  this  fable,  which 
has  a political  end  in  view,  with  Fable  39,  Part  I.  v.  3,  4. 

Fab.  XXXII. — There  is  no  prose  version  extant  of  this 
singular  fable.  But  it  may  be  compared  with  Babr.  Part  I.  Fab. 
57.  and  Part  II.  52,  with  which  it,  in  parts,  corresponds.  The 
three  concluding  verses  seem  hopelessly  corrupt,  and  defy 
translation. 

Fab.  XXXVII.— Cf.  Fab.  XII.  p.  1,  and  Fab.  XC.  Part  II. 
and  see  Note  on  the  former. 

Fab.  XXXIX. — Horace,  Epist.  I.  x.  34.  Aristot.  Rhet.  II.  20. 

Fab.  XLI.  6. — Pliny,  in  his  Natural  History,  x.  24,  says  of 
the  cock,  “ that  it  is  an  object  of  terror  even  to  lions,  the 
noblest  of  the  brute  kind.”  The  elephant  seems  to  be  very 


Notes  to  Babrius . 


229 


sensitive  of  the  attacks  of  insects,  frequently  rolling  itself  in  mud, 
contracting  his  skin,  and  so  crushing  them  between  its  wrinkles, 
or  gathering  boughs  with  his  trunk  to  brush  them  away,  or,  if 
these  artifices  fail,  collecting  dust  with  his  trunk,  and  strewing  it 
over  the  most  sensible  parts  of  his  body.  See  Encycl.  Britann. 
Art.  Mammalia,  vol.  12,  pp.  469,  70. 

Fab.  XLIL— Compare  Fab.  LXV.  in  Part  I.  and  LXXXV. 
Part  II.  Avianus,  Fab.  15,  says,  “Threiciam  volucrem  fertur 
Junonius  ales,”  &c.,  and  iFlian  notes  that  the  crane  migrates  in 
the  autumn  to  Libya  and  iEgypt,  N.  A.  II-  1,  III.  13.  Compare 
Aristoph.  Aves.  710.  The  epimyth  here  and  at  Fable  LXV.  in 
the  first  part  are  very  simular. 

Fab.  LI. — Compare  CXXVIII.  in  Part  I. 

Fab.  LII. — Compare  above,  Fab.  XXXI.  Part  II. 

Fab.  LIII.  LIV. — Compare  with  these  respectively,  Fragm.  I. 
in  Part  I.  and  Fable  CXXV.  in  Part  I.  The  translation  is  made 
up  of  a comparison  of  both.  The  Maltese  dog  is  mentioned  by 
Aristot.  H.  A.  X.  6 ; Probl.  X.  12. 

Fab.  LIX. — In  the  application  of  the  fable  of  the  Belly  and 
its  Members,  as  related  by  Shakespeare,  (Coriolanus,  Act  I. 
Scene  1,)  Menenius  calls  one  of  the  citizens,  “ the  great  toe  of 
the  assembly,” 

“ For  that  being  one  of  the  lowest,  basest,  poorest. 

Of  this  most  wise  rebellion,  thou  goest  forward.” 

The  fables  are  wholly  dissimilar  in  purpose,  but  these  words  of 
Shakespeare  are  a parallel  to  the  description  of  the  tail  in  this 
fable  of  Babrius. 

Fab.  LXIV. — Simonides  of  Amorgos,  in  his  poem  tt epl 
7 waiKooi/,  represents  Jove  as  having  formed  women  out  of  brutes, 
availing  himself  of  the  nature  of  each,  e.g.  the  craft  of  the  fox, 
or  the  cleverness  of  the  ape,  in  moulding  the  nature  and 


230 


Notes  to  Babrius . 


character  of  each  woman.  For  Prometheus,  and  his  part  in  the 
fable,  Cf.  Horace,  Od.  I.  xvi.  13  “Fertur  Prometheus,”  &c. 
Fulgent,  Mythol.  III.  De  Peleo,  and  see  Ovid  Met.  1.^82 — 8. 
See  also  above.  Part  I.  Fab.  LXVI.  note. 

Fab.  LXVII. — The  reading  ^rjprjv  instead  of  Orjprjv  in  v.  14 
has-been  adopted  for  translation. 

Fab.  LXXI. — See  note  in  Kitto’s  Bible  on  Psalm  lii.  8,  re- 
specting the  greenness  and  long  life  of  the  olive  tree. 

Fab.  LXXII. — Avianus  (Fab.  40)  has  a version  of  this  fable, 
the  concluding  lines  of  which  are, — 

Vade,  ait,  et  pictae  nimium  confide  figurse, 

Dum  mihi  consilium  pulchrius  esse  queat, 
Miremurque  magis  quos  munera  mentis  adornant, 
Quam  qui  corporeis  enituere  bonis. 

Fab.  LXXIII. — Compare  Aristotle,  Rhet.  II.  20,  where,  how- 
ever, a demagogue,  not  a rich  man,  is  represented  as  on  his  trial. 
Tiberius  used  this  fable,  a little  altered,  as  a reason  for  not  often 
changing  governors  of  provinces,  or  appointing  successors, 
unless  in  case  of  a governor’s  death.  See  Whiston’s  Josephus, 
Antiq.  Jews,  Book  XVIII.  c.  vi.  note  5. 

Fab.  LXXVIII. — Compare  with  this  fable,  illustrative  of  the 
force  of  nature,  Part  I.  Fab.  XXXII,  It  is  given  also  by- 
Lucian  ; Piscator,  c.  36,  who  likewise  tells  it  of  a king  of  Egypt. 
See  also  Lucian’s  Apology,  c.  v.  where  the  monkeys  are  said  to 
have  been  the  property  of  Cleopatra. 

Fab.  LXXX.— See  Aristot.  H.  A.  IX.  40.  Pliny,  H.  A.  XI. 
c.  17.  Nicander  Theriaca,  v.  809.  Virg.  Georg.  IV.  236,  and 
Servius’s  note  there. 

Fab.  LXXXI. — Compare  the  story  of  Atys  and  Adrastus, 
Herodot.  I.  34 — 45. 

Fab.  LXXXI V. — Sir  G.  C.  Lewis  suggests  the  omission  of 


Notes  to  Babrius . 


231 


v.  2 in  the  text  of  this  fable,  and,  for  ukvttovs,  reading  ‘Uireveu  in 
the  end  of  v.  1. 

Fab.  LXXXVI. — This  fable  is  narrated  nearly  word  for  word 
by  Sylla,  in  a speech  recorded  in  Appian’s  Civil  Wars,  Book  I. 
p.  413.  Steph.  q.  v. 

Fab.  XC. — Compare  with  this  fable,  Fab.  XII.  Part  I. 
According  to  Homer,  Od.  XIX.  517 — 23,  Zethus,  king  of 
Thebes,  married  Aedon,  daughter  of  Pandareus,  and  Itylus  was 
the  offspring  of  this  union.  She  slew  her  son  in  mistake  for  the 
eldest  child  of  Niobe,  her  husband’s  brother’s  wife.  Sir  G.  C. 
Lewis  suggests  reading  ptr] rpds  or  JlpoKV7]s  at  the  end  of  v.  42, 
for  Z 7}0ov,  and  referring  the  whole,  as  is  most  natural,  to  the 
tragical  tale  of  Tereus  and  Procne.  Itylus  was  slain  by  the 
sword  of  Aedon,  not  of  Zethus. 

Fab.  XCV. — For  the  proverb  irepl  ovov  CKias,  see  Lucian. 
Hermotim  71 ; Aristoph.  Vesp.  191,  and  the  Scholiast  there, 
who  says  that  the  fable  was  used  by  Menander,  in  one  of  his 
plays  ; and  by  Demosthenes,  see  Orat.  De  Pace,  p.  63,  notes, 
and  Plat.  Phsedr.  p.  203,  and  the  notes  of  Ast  and  others.  It 
seems,  in  all  these  passages,  that  the  proverb  refers  to  conten- 
tions about  matters  of  the  very  slightest  moment. 


FINIS. 


j 

l 


4 


[SOUND by, 


